OFD BATTALION CHIEF EXAM — DETAILED STUDY NOTES
ICS SOPS
============================================================


--- ICS 1-0 ---
application of only those elements that are necessary at a particular incident. The structure of the ICS can be established and expanded depending upon the changing conditions of the incident. The orderly assumption and transfer of command are also an integral part of the ICS. Incident Commander (IC) is a title that can apply equally to an engine company captain, or to the chief of the department, depending upon the situation. The incident drives ICS, not the other way around. A formal ICS may also be prepared, set up, and utilized in a proactive manner at large planned events (i.e., College World Series, etc.) Implementation of the Incident Command System The incident command system will be applied to every incident from the arrival of the first unit until termination. As such, the system can be used for any type or size of emergency, ranging from a minor incident involving a single unit, to a major emergency involving several agencies. While assumption of command at small scale incidents (i.e., vehicle fire) may consist of only a company officer in command of his/her crew, the principle of one individual in overall command shall apply. Organizational positions are filled as the incident grows and span of control measures become necessary. Routine application of the ICS will promote and increase familiarity with the system concept even when the need to apply a formal command structure is not obvious. Ever y Fire Department member will be sufficiently familiar with the basic responsibilities and communication protocols to assume the role of the initial incident commander. Where an incident that OFD resources are operating at is under the overall jurisdiction of another agency that has not implemented an incident management system, the highest ranking OFD officer at the incident shall utilize this ICS to manage on scene OFD operations and coordinate activities with the agency having overall jurisdiction. Operating Requirements The design requirements for the ICS are the following:    Can provide for the following kinds of operations: - Single jurisdiction/single agency involvement - Single jurisdiction with multi-agency involvement; and - Multi-jurisdictional/multi-agency involvement.    Organizational structure can be adapted to any emergency or incident to which fire protection agencies would be expected to respond.    Can be applicable and acceptable to users throughout the country.    Should be readily adaptable to new technology.    Must be able to expand in a logical manner from an initial attack situation.
   Must have basic common elements in organization, terminology, and procedures. This allows for the maximum application and use of already developed qualifications and standards, and ensures continuation of a total mobility concept.    Implementation should cause the least possible disruption to existing systems.    Must be effective in fulfilling all of the above requirements and yet be simple enough to ensure low operational maintenance costs. Components of the Incident Command System The ICS has a number of components. These components working together interactively provide the basis for an effective ICS concept of operation:    Common terminology;    Modular organization;    Management by objectives    Incident action planning    Integrated communications;    Establishment and transfer of command    Chain of command and Unity of command    Unified Command structure;    Accountability    Manageable span of control;    Designated incident facilities and locations    Comprehensive resource management.    Dispatch/Deployment    Information and Intelligence management Organization and Operations The ICS has five major functional areas: 1. COMMAND: Responsible for overall management of the incident    Incident Safety    Public Information.    Liaison 2. OPERATIONS: Responsible for the direct management of all incident-related tactical activities.    Branches    Divisions/Groups
3. PLANNING: Responsible for collecting, evaluating, and disseminating incident situation information and intelligence.    Resource unit    Situation unit    Documentation unit    Demobilization unit    Technical specialists 4. LOGISTICS: Responsible for all service support requirements needed to facilitate effective and efficient incident management.    Service Branch o Communications unit o Medical unit (Responder rehab) o Food unit    Support Branch o Supply unit o Facilities unit o Ground support unit 5. FINANCE/ADMINISTRATION: Responsible for on-scene or incident-specific finance and other administrative support services.    Time unit    Procurement unit    Compensation/Claims unit    Cost unit In addition to the above five major functional areas, a sixth functional area, INTELLIGENCE/INVESTIGATIONS, may also be established, depending on the incident. This area is responsible for the collection, analysis, and sharing of incident -related intelligence. Common Responsibilities The following checklist is applicable to all ICS personnel: A. Receive assignment from your agency, including: 1. Job assignment, e.g., Group/Division designation, etc. 2. Assignment location 3. Reporting time 4. Travel instructions 5. Any special communications instructions
B. Upon arrival at the incident, check in at the designated location. Check in may be found at: 1. Incident Command Post 2. Base or camp 3. Staging area 4. Helibases 5. If you are instructed to report directly to a line assignment, check in with the Division/Group supervisor. C. Receive briefing from immediate supervisor D. Acquire work materials E. Conduct all tasks in a manner that ensures safety and welfare of you and your co- workers F. Organize and brief subordinates G. Know the assigned radio frequency for your area of responsibility and ensure that communication equipment is operating properly H. Use clear text and ICS terminology (no codes) in all radio communications. I. Complete forms and reports required of the assigned position and send through supervisor to Documentation unit. J. Respond to demobilization orders and brief subordinates regarding demobilization.
Full ICS Organizational Chart Information/Intelligence not shown
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 1-1 ICS DEFINITIONS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1             New Format             Oct 2015       Langlois 888     Hunter 723        Hunter 723 Agency Administrator/Executive: The official responsible for administering policy for an agency or jurisdiction. An Agency Administrator/Executive (or other public official with jurisdictional responsibility for the incident) usually makes the decision to establish an Area Command. Agency Representative: A person assigned by a primary, assisting, or cooperating Federal, State, tribal, or local government agency, or nongovernmental or private organization, that has been delegated authority to make decisions affecting that agency’s or organization’s participation in incident management activities following appropriate consultation with the leadership of that agency. Agency reps report to the Liaison Officer. All-Hazards: Describing an incident, natural or manmade, that warrants action to protect life, property, environment, and public health or safety, and to minimize disruptions of government, social, or economic activities. Area Command: An organization established to oversee the management of multiple incidents that are each being handled by a separate Incident Command System organization or to oversee the management of a very large or evolving incident that has multiple Incident Management Teams engaged. An Agency Administrator/Executive or other public official with jurisdictional responsibility for the incident usually makes the decision to establish an Area Command. An Area Command is activated only if necessary, depending on the complexity of the incident and incident management span-of-control considerations. Assessment: The process of acquiring, collecting, processing, examining, analyzing, evaluating, monitoring, and interpreting the data, information, evidence, objects, measurements, images, sound, etc., whether tangible or intangible, to provide a basis for decision-making. Assigned Resource: A resource status condition indicating that a resource has arrived, checked in, been given an assignment, and is performing an active function. Assignment: Task given to a personnel resource to perform within a given operational period that is based on operational objectives defined in the Incident Action Plan.

--- ICS 1-1 ---
Assistant: Title for subordinates of principal Command Staff positions. The title indicates a level of technical capability, qualifications, and responsibility subordinate to the primary positions. Assistants may also be assigned to Unit Leaders. Assisting Agency: An agency or organization providing personnel, services, or other resources to the agency with direct responsibility for incident management. See Supporting Agency. Assume: Term used for strategic and tactical level assignments. “E-34 Capt. Assume Div. 3 Supervisor” Available Resource: A resource status condition indicating that a resource has arrived at the incident, checked in, and is available for an assignment, normally located in a staging area. Branch: The organizational level having functional or geographical responsibility for major aspects of incident operations. A Branch is organizationally situated between the Section Chief and the Division or Group in the Operations Section, and between the Section and Units in the Logistics Section. Branches are identified by the use of Roman numerals/geographical areas or by functional area. Brief Initial Report (BIR): The initial status report, which includes all of the information necessary to “paint a picture” of the situation found for other responding resources and establish the operations at an incident. (See OPS 10-0 Communications SOP). Brief Progress Report (BPR): Periodic information on the status of an incident designed to keep interested parties informed about the progress of the incident. (See OPS 10 -0 Communications SOP). Cache: A predetermined complement of tools, equipment, and/or supplies stored in a designated location, available for incident use. Camp: A geographical site within the general incident area (separate from the Incident Base) that is equipped and staffed to provide sleeping, food, water, and sanitary services to incident personnel. Categorizing Resources: The process of organizing resources by category, kind, and type, including size, capacity, capability, skill, and other characteristics. This makes the resource ordering and dispatch process within and across organizations and agencies, and between governmental and nongovernmental entities, more efficient, and ensures that the resources received are appropriate to their needs. Chain of Command: The orderly line of authority within the ranks of the incident management organization.
Check-In: The process through which resources first report to an incident. All responders, regardless of agency affiliation, must report in to receive an assignment in accordance with the procedures established by the Incident Commander. Chief: The Incident Command System title for individuals responsible for management of functional Sections: Operations, Planning, Logistics, Finance/Administration, and Intelligence/Investigations (if established as a separate Section). Command: The act of directing, ordering, or controlling by virtue of explicit statutory, regulatory, or delegated authority. Also, the radio designation of the Incident Commander (IC). Command Staff: The staff who report directly to the Incident Commander, including the Public Information Officer, Safety Officer, Liaison Officer, and other positions as required. They may have an assistant or assistants, as needed. Common Operating Picture: An overview of an incident by all relevant parties that provides incident information enabling the Incident Commander/Unified Command and any supporting agencies and organizations to make effective, consistent, and timely decisions. Common Terminology: Normally used words and phrases—avoiding the use of different words/phrases for same concepts—to ensure consistency and to allow diverse incident management and support organizations to work together across a wide variety of incident management functions and hazard scenarios. Communications/Dispatch Center/Agency Dispatch: Agency or interagency dispatch centers, 911 call centers, emergency control or command dispatch centers, or any naming convention given to the facility and staff that handles emergency calls from the public, communication with emergency management/response personnel, and from which resources are sent to incidents. (i.e., Douglas County 911 Center). Communications Unit: Functional unit within the Service Branch of the Logistics Section responsible for the Incident Communications Plan, the installation and repair of communications equipment, and operation of the Incident Communications Center. Compensation/Claims Unit: Functional unit within the Finance/Administration Section responsible for financial concerns resulting from response personnel injuries/fatal ities at an incident Cooperating Agency: An agency supplying assistance other than direct operational or support functions or resources to the incident management effort. Cost Unit: Functional unit within the Finance/Administration Section responsible for tracking costs, analyzing cost data, making cost estimates, and recommending cost -saving measures.
Crew: A specific number of personnel not to exceed the recommended span of control of five assembled for an assignment, most often used when company assignments are not available. Crew Accountability Report (CAR): Report given by a tactical level officer (Grp/Div. Supervisor) to the IC to account for the location and wellbeing of single resources (crews) assigned to them. Crew Resource Management (CRM): Information gathering by utilizing all available resources including equipment and personnel to provide for a more efficient, effective and safer operation. CRM provides for:    Better teamwork    Newly acquired communication and problem solving skills    An operating philosophy that promotes team member input while preserving legal authority    Proactive accident prevention. Delegation of Authority: A statement provided to the Incident Commander by the Agency Executive delegating authority and assigning responsibility. The delegation of authority can include objectives, priorities, expectations, constraints, and other considerations or guidelines, as needed. Many agencies require written delegation of authority to be given to the Incident Commander prior to assuming command on larger incidents. Demobilization: The orderly, safe, and efficient return of an incident resource to its original location and status. Demobilization Unit: Functional unit within the Planning Section responsible for assuring orderly, safe, efficient demobilization of resources committed to an incident. Department Operations Center (DOC): An Emergency Operations Center (EOC) specific to a single department or agency. The focus of a DOC is on internal agency incident management and response. DOCs are often linked to and, in most cases, are physically represented in a combined agency EOC by authorized agent(s) for the department or agency. Deputy: A fully qualified individual who, in the absence of a superior, can be delegated the authority to manage a functional operation or to perform a specific task. In some cases a deputy can act as relief for a superior, and therefore must be fully qualified in the position. Deputies generally can be assigned to the Incident Commander, General Staff, and Branch Directors. Director: The Incident Command System title for individuals responsible for supervision of a Branch.
Division: The organizational level having responsibility for operations within a defined geographic area. Divisions are established when the number of resources exceeds the manageable span of control of the IC/Section Chief. See Group. Documentation Unit: Functional unit within the Planning Section responsible for recording/protecting all documents relevant to an incident. Emergency Operations Center (EOC): The physical location at which the coordination of information and resources to support incident management (on-scene operations) activities normally takes place. An EOC may be a temporary facility or may be located in a more central or permanently established facility, perhaps at a higher level of organization within a jurisdiction. EOCs may be organized by major functional disciplines (e.g., fire, law enforcement, medical services), by jurisdiction (e.g., Federal, State, regional, tribal, city, county), or by some combination thereof. Dynamic Risk Assessment (DRA): Recognition of transitory hazards that are sure to exist at some point during the incident, evaluation of those hazards, and application of a though process that justifies choice of procedures/tactics. The building condition, the fire progress, and the operating situation will be evaluated over and over again, and appropriate actions shall be taken to preserve the life and safety of firefighters. Emergency Operations Plan: An ongoing plan for responding to a wide variety of potential hazards. Emergency Public Information: Information that is disseminated primarily in anticipation of or during an emergency. In addition to providing situational information to the public, it frequently provides directive actions required to be taken by the general public. Engine Company: A ground vehicle providing specified levels of pumping capacity, water, hose, and personnel. Evacuation: The organized, phased, and supervised withdrawal, dispersal, or removal of civilians from dangerous or potentially dangerous areas, and their reception and care in safe areas. (Not to be confused with a Firefighter Emergency Evacuation.) Facilities Unit: Functional unit within the Support Branch of the Logistics Section responsible for providing fixed facilities at an incident, including Base, feeding areas, sanitary facilities, and a formal Incident Command Post (ICP). Field Operations Guide (FOG): Durable pocket or desk guides that contain essential information required to perform specific assignments or functions. Finance/Administration Section: The ICS Section responsible for all administrative and financial considerations surrounding an incident.
Food Unit: Functional unit within the Service Branch of the Logistics Section responsible for providing meals to personnel involved in an incident. General Staff: A group of incident management personnel organized according to function and reporting to the Incident Commander. The General Staff normally consists of the Operations Section Chief, Planning Section Chief, Logistics Section Chief, and Finance/Administration Section Chief. An Intelligence/Investigations Chief may be established, if required, to meet incident management needs. Ground Support Unit: Functional unit within the Support Branch of the Logistics Section responsible for fueling/maintaining/repairing vehicles and the transportation of personnel and supplies at an incident. Group: An organizational subdivision established to divide the incident management structure into functional areas of operation. Groups are composed of resources assembled to perform a special function not necessarily within a single geographic division. See Division. Incident: An occurrence, natural or manmade, that requires a response to protect life or property. Incidents can, for example, include major disasters, emergencies, terrorist attacks, terrorist threats, civil unrest, wildland and urban fires, floods, hazardous materials spills, nuclear accidents, aircraft accidents, earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms, tsunamis, war-related disasters, public health and medical emergencies, and other occurrences requiring an emergency response. Incident Action Plan (IAP): A plan for an organized course of events that addresses all phases of incident control within a specified time. Incident Base: The location at which primary Logistics functions for an incident are coordinated and administered. There is only one Base per incident. (Incident name or other designator will be added to the term Base.) The Incident Command Post may be co-located with the Incident Base. Incident Command: The Incident Command System organizational element responsible for overall management of the incident and consisting of the Incident Commander (either single or unified command structure) and any assigned supporting staff. Referred to as the radio designation of “Command”. Incident Commander (IC): The individual responsible for all incident activities, including the development of strategies and tactics and the ordering and release of resources. The IC has overall authority and responsibility for conducting incident operations and is responsible for the management of all incident operations.
Incident Command Post (ICP): The field location where the primary functions are performed. The ICP may be co-located with the Incident Base or other facilities. Incident Command System (ICS): A standardized on-scene emergency management construct specifically designed to provide an integrated organizational structure that reflects the complexity and demands of single or multiple incidents, without being hindered by jurisdictional boundaries. ICS is the combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures, and communications operating within a common organizational structure, designed to aid in the management of resources during incidents. It is used for all kinds of emergencies and is applicable to small as well as large and complex incidents. ICS is used by various jurisdictions and functional agencies, both public and private, to organize field- level incident management operations. Incident Management: The broad spectrum of activities and organizations providing effective and efficient operations, coordination, and support applied at all levels of government, utilizing both governmental and nongovernmental resources to plan for, respond to, and recover from an incident, regardless of cause, size, or complexity. Incident Management Team (IMT): An Incident Commander and the appropriate Command and General Staff personnel assigned to an incident. The level of training and experience of the IMT members, coupled with the identified formal response requirements and responsibilities of the IMT, are factors in determining “type,” or level, of IMT. Incident Objectives: Statements of guidance and direction needed to select appropriate strategy(s) and the tactical direction of resources. Incident objectives are based on realistic expectations of what can be accomplished when all allocated resources have been effectively deployed. Incident objectives must be achievable and measurable, yet flexible enough to allow strategic and tactical alternatives. Incident Safety Officer (ISO): A member of the Command Staff responsible for monitoring incident operations and advising the IC on all matters relating to operational safety, including the health/safety of emergency responder personnel. Information Management: The collection, organization, and control over the structure, processing, and delivery of information from one or more sources and distribution to one or more audiences who have a stake in that information. Initiate: Term used for task level assignments. “Engine 1 is initiating fire attack” Intelligence/Investigations: An organizational subset within ICS. Intelligence gathered within the Intelligence/Investigations function is information that either leads to the detection, prevention, apprehension, and prosecution of criminal activities—or the individual(s) involved—including terrorist incidents or information that leads to determination of the cause
of a given incident (regardless of the source) such as public health events or fires with unknown origins. This is different from the normal operational and situational intelligence gathered and reported by the Planning Section. Interoperability: Ability of systems, personnel, and equipment to provide and receive functionality, data, information and/or services to and from other systems, personnel, and equipment, between both public and private agencies, departments, and other organizations, in a manner enabling them to operate effectively together. Allows emergency management/response personnel and their affiliated organizations to communicate within and across agencies and jurisdictions via voice, data, or video-on-demand, in real time, when needed, and when authorized. Joint Information Center (JIC): A facility established to coordinate all incident-related public information activities. It is the central point of contact for all news media. Public information officials from all participating agencies should co-locate at the JIC. Jurisdiction: A range or sphere of authority. Public agencies have jurisdiction at an incident related to their legal responsibilities and authority. Jurisdictional authority at an incident can be political or geographical (e.g., Federal, State, tribal, local boundary lines) or functional (e.g., law enforcement, public health). Jurisdictional Agency: The agency having jurisdiction and responsibility for a specific geographical area, or a mandated function. Key Resource: Any publicly or privately controlled resource essential to the minimal operations of the economy and government. Kind: An Incident Command System resource classification that describes what a specific single resource is. (i.e., Engine, Truck, Water Tender, etc.) Leader: Functional title of any individual in command of a Crew, Task Force, Strike Team, or functional unit. Liaison Officer: A member of the Command Staff responsible for coordinating with representatives from cooperating and assisting agencies or organizations. Logistics: The process and procedure for providing resources and other services to support incident management. Logistics Section: The Incident Command System Section responsible for providing facilities, services, and material support for the incident.
Management by Objectives: A management approach that involves a five-step process for achieving the incident goal. The Management by Objectives approach includes the following: establishing overarching incident objectives; developing strategies based on overarching incident objectives; developing and issuing assignments, plans, procedures, and protocols; establishing specific, measurable tactics or tasks for various incident-management functional activities and directing efforts to attain them, in support of defined strategies; and documenting results to measure performance and facilitate corrective action. Manager: Individual within an Incident Command System organizational unit who is assigned specific managerial responsibilities (e.g., Staging Area Manager or Camp Manager). Medical Group/Branch: An organizational element providing an expandable system for handling patients at the emergency scene. Medical Unit: Functional unit within the Service Branch of the Logistics function responsible for developing the Medical Emergency Plan and for providing emergency medical treatment of on scene emergency personnel. Often Responder Rehab will be co-located with the Medical Unit. Mitigation: Activities providing a critical foundation in the effort to reduce the loss of life and property from natural and/or manmade disasters by avoiding or lessening the impact of a disaster and providing value to the public by creating safer communities. Mitigation seeks to fix the cycle of disaster damage, reconstruction, and repeated damage. These activities or actions, in most cases, will have a long-term sustained effect. Mobilization: The process and procedures used by all organizations—Federal, State, tribal, and local—for activating, assembling, and transporting all resources that have been requested to respond to or support an incident. Multi-agency Incident: An incident where one or more agencies assist a jurisdictional agency. May be single or Unified Command. Multi-casualty Incident: An incident where the numbers of casualties and the types of injuries exceed the resource capability of the responding agency. (EMS 5 -0 SOP states 10 or more victims). Multi-agency Coordination System (MACS): A system that provides the architecture to support coordination for incident prioritization, critical resource allocation, communications systems integration, and information coordination. MACS assist agencies and organizations responding to an incident. The elements of a MACS include facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures, and communications. Two of the most commonly used elements are Emergency Operations Centers and MAC Groups.
Multi-jurisdictional Incident: An incident requiring action from multiple agencies that each have jurisdiction to manage certain aspects of an incident. In the Incident Command System, these incidents will be managed under a Unified Command. Mutual Aid Agreement or Assistance Agreement: Written or oral agreement between and among agencies/organizations and/or jurisdictions that provides a mechanism to quickly obtain emergency assistance in the form of personnel, equipment, materials, and other associated services. The primary objective is to facilitate rapid, short- term deployment of emergency support prior to, during, and/or after an incident. National Incident Management System (NIMS): A set of principles that provides a systematic, proactive approach guiding government agencies at all levels, nongovernmental organizations, and the private sector to work seamlessly to prevent, protect against, respond to, recover from, and mitigate the effects of incidents, regardless of cause, size, location, or complexity, in order to reduce the loss of life or property and harm to the environment. Nongovernmental Organization (NGO): An entity with an association that is based on interests of its members, individuals, or institutions. It is not created by a government, but it may work cooperatively with government. Such organizations serve a public p urpose, not a private benefit. Examples of NGOs include faith-based charity organizations and the American Red Cross. NGOs, including voluntary and faith-based groups, provide relief services to sustain life, reduce physical and emotional distress, and promote the recovery of disaster victims. Often these groups provide specialized services that help individuals with disabilities. NGOs and voluntary organizations play a major role in assisting emergency managers before, during, and after an emergency. Officer: The Incident Command System title for a person responsible for one of the Command Staff positions of Safety, Liaison, and Public Information. Operational Period: The time scheduled for executing a given set of operation actions, as specified in the Incident Action Plan. Operational periods can be of various lengths (4, 6, 8 hours), although usually they last 12 to 24 hours. Operations Section: The Incident Command System (ICS) Section responsible for all tactical incident operations and implementation of the Incident Action Plan. In ICS, the Operations Section normally includes subordinate Branches, Divisions, and/or Groups. Out of Service: A resource status condition indicating that an assigned resource is unable to function due to mechanical, personnel, or health reasons (i.e., Resource is in Rehab).
Personnel Accountability: The ability to account for the location and welfare of incident personnel. It is accomplished when supervisors ensure that Incident Command System principles and processes are functional and that personnel are working within established incident management guidelines. Personnel Accountability Reports (PARs): Report given by task level supervisors to their direct ICS supervisor (tactical or strategic level) in order to accurately account for the location and wellbeing of all personnel. (See OPS 10-0 Communications SOP). Planning Meeting: A meeting held as needed before and throughout the duration of an incident to select specific strategies and tactics for incident control operations and for service and support planning. For larger incidents, the Planning Meeting is a major element in the development of the Incident Action Plan. Planning Section: The Incident Command System Section responsible for the collection, evaluation, and dissemination of operational information related to the incident, and for the preparation and documentation of the Incident Action Plan. This Section also maintains information on the current and forecasted situation and on the status of resources assign ed to the incident. Portability: An approach that facilitates the interaction of systems that are normally distinct. Portability of radio technologies, protocols, and frequencies among emergency management/response personnel will allow for the successful and efficient integration, transport, and deployment of communications systems when necessary. Portability includes the standardized assignment of radio channels across jurisdictions, which allows responders to participate in an incident outside their jurisdiction and still use familiar equipment. Pre-Positioned Resource: A resource moved to an area near the expected incident site in response to anticipated resource needs. Procurement Unit: Functional unit within the Finance/Administration Section responsible for financial matters involving vendors. Public Information: Processes, procedures, and systems for communicating timely, accurate, and accessible information on an incident’s cause, size, and current situation; resources committed; and other matters of general interest to the public, responders, and additional stakeholders (both directly affected and indirectly affected). Public Information Officer: A member of the Command Staff responsible for interfacing with the public and media and/or with other agencies with incident-related information requirements.
Rapid Intervention Crew (RIC): A crew or company designated, with necessary preparation, procedures, tools and equipment, to rescue firefighters should it become necessary. Recovery: The development, coordination, and execution of service- and site-restoration plans; the reconstitution of government operations and services; individual, private -sector, nongovernmental, and public assistance programs to provide housing and to promote restoration; long-term care and treatment of affected persons; additional measures for social, political, environmental, and economic restoration; evaluation of the incident to identify lessons learned; post incident reporting; and development of initiatives to m itigate the effects of future incidents. Recovery Plan: A plan developed to restore an affected area or community. Reimbursement: A mechanism to recoup funds expended for incident-specific expenses. Rescue Group Supervisor (RGS): Usually a chief officer that is assigned to supervise one or more Rapid Intervention Crews during a firefighter rescue. The RGS coordinates the rescue effort and supports the RIC(s) with communications, staffing, equipment, and special needs. Resource Management: A system for identifying available resources at all jurisdictional levels to enable timely, efficient, and unimpeded access to resources needed to prepare for, respond to, or recover from an incident. Resource management under the National Incident Management System includes mutual aid agreements and assistance agreements; the use of special Federal, State, tribal, and local teams; and resource mobilization protocols. Resource Tracking: A standardized, integrated process conducted prior to, during, and after an incident by all emergency management/response personnel and their associated organizations. Resource Unit: Functional unit within the Planning Section responsible for recording the status of resources committed to an incident. Resources: Personnel and major items of equipment, supplies, and facilities available or potentially available for assignment to incident operations and for which status is maintained. Resources are described by kind and type and may be used in operational support or supervisory capacities at an incident or at an Emergency Operations Center. Response: Activities that address the short-term, direct effects of an incident. Response includes immediate actions to save lives, protect property, and meet basic human needs. Response also includes the execution of emergency operations plans and of mitigation
activities designed to limit the loss of life, personal injury, property damage, an d other unfavorable outcomes. Responder Rehabilitation: A function of the Medical Unit, in Logistics, responsible for monitoring, evaluating, and appropriate action with respect to the medical condition of emergency personnel on the incident scene. Also known as "Rehab." Section: The Incident Command System organizational level having responsibility for a major functional area of incident management (e.g., Operations, Planning, Logistics, Finance/Administration, and Intelligence/Investigations (if established)). The Section is organizationally situated between the Branch and the Incident Command. Service Branch: A Branch within the Logistics Section responsible for service activities at an incident, including Communication, Medical, and Food Units. Single Resource: An individual, piece of equipment and its personnel complement, or a crew/team of individuals with an identified work supervisor that can be used on an incident. Situation Unit: Functional unit within the Planning Section responsible for the collection, organization, and analysis of incident information, and for analysis of a situation as it progresses. Size Up: The mental evaluation of the various factors at an incident that lead to the determination of the problems that must be solved. Span of Control: The number of resources for which a supervisor is responsible, usually expressed as the ratio of supervisors to individuals. Under the National Incident Management System, an appropriate span of control is between 1:3 and 1:7, with optimal being 1:5. Staging Area: Temporary location for available resources. A Staging Area can be any location in which personnel, supplies, and equipment can be temporarily housed or parked while awaiting operational assignment. Stairwell Support: A high-rise Logistics function responsible for the movement of equipment from Base to Staging when using the stairwell. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP): A complete reference document or an operations manual that provides the purpose, authorities, duration, and details for the preferred method of performing a single function or a number of interrelated functions in a uniform manner. Strategy: The general plan or direction selected to accomplish incident objectives.
Strike Team: A set number of resources of the same kind and type that have an established minimum number of personnel, common communications, and a leader. Supervisor: The Incident Command System title for an individual responsible for a Division or Group. Supply Unit: Functional unit within the Support Branch of the Logistics Section responsible for ordering equipment/supplies required for incident operations. Support Branch: A Branch within the Logistics Section responsible for providing the personnel, equipment, and supplies to support incident operations. Includes Supply, Facilities, and Ground Support Units. Supporting Agency: An agency that provides support and/or resource assistance to another agency. See Assisting Agency. Supporting Technology: Any technology that may be used to support the National Incident Management System, such as ortho-photo mapping, remote automatic weather stations, infrared technology, Geospatial Information Systems (GIS), or communications. Tactics: The deployment and directing of resources on an incident to accomplish the objectives designated by strategy. Task Force: Any combination of resources assembled to support a specific mission or operational need. All resource elements within a Task Force must have common communications and a designated leader. Technical Specialist: Person with special skills that can be used anywhere within the Incident Command System organization. No minimum qualifications are prescribed, as technical specialists normally perform the same duties during an incident that they per form in their everyday jobs, and they are typically certified in their fields or professions. Terrorism: As defined in the Homeland Security Act of 2002, activity that involves an act that is dangerous to human life or potentially destructive of critical infrastructure or key resources; is a violation of the criminal laws of the United States or of any State or other subdivision of the United States; and appears to be intended to intimidate or coerce a civilian population, to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion, or to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping. Threat: Natural or manmade occurrence, individual, entity, or action that has or indicates the potential to harm life, information, operations, the environment, and/or property.
Time Unit: A functional unit in Finance/Administration Section responsible for records of time for personnel and hired equipment working at an incident. Truck Company: A ground vehicle providing an aerial platform or ladder, elevated stream, ground ladders, and personnel. Type: An Incident Command System resource classification that refers to the capability of a resource. Type 1 is generally considered to be more capable than Types 2, 3, or 4, respectively, because of size, power, capacity, or (in the case of Incident Management Teams) experience and qualifications. Unified Approach: The integration of resource management, communications and information management, and command and management in order to form an effective system. Unified Area Command: Version of command established when incidents under an Area Command are multijurisdictional. See Area Command. Unified Command (UC): An Incident Command System application used when more than one agency has incident jurisdiction or when incidents cross political jurisdictions. Agencies work together through the designated members of the UC, often the senior persons from agencies and/or disciplines participating in the UC, to establish a common set of objecti ves and strategies and a single Incident Action Plan. Unit: The organizational element with functional responsibility for a specific incident planning, logistics, or finance/administration activity. Unit Leader: The individual in charge of managing Units within an Incident Command System (ICS) functional Section. The Unit can be staffed by a number of support personnel providing a wide range of services. Some of the support positions are pre-established within ICS (e.g., Base/Camp Manager), but many others will be assigned as technical specialists. Unity of Command: An Incident Command System principle stating that each individual involved in incident operations will be assigned to only one supervisor. Water Tender: Any ground vehicle capable of transporting specific amounts of water.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 1-2 COMPONENTS OF ICS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #     REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED        AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1                New Format              Nov 2015        Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 PURPOSE The ICS has fourteen management components. These components working together interactively provide the basis for an effective ICS concept of operation. Common Terminology ICS establishes common terminology that allows different organizations nationwide to work together. Major organizational functions and units are pre-designated and titled in the ICS, and the system’s terminology is standard and consistent. This common terminology covers: A. Organizational Functions: Major functions and functional units are named and defined (i.e., Groups, Divisions, Branches, etc.). B. Resource Descriptions: Major resources including personnel, facilities, major equipment and supply items are given common names according to their “kind” (i.e., engine, truck, etc.) and are “typed” with respect to their capabilities (i.e., Type I engine, Type II engine, etc.), with Type I being the most capable. C. Incident Facilities: Common terminology is used to designate the facilities in the vicinity of the incident area that will be used during the course of the incident (i.e., Staging, Base, Incident Command Post, etc.) The following is a list of ICS organizational titles with the corresponding supervisor title: Incident Command                             Incident Commander Command Staff                                Officer General Staff                                Chief Branch                                       Director Division/Group                               Supervisor Unit                                         Leader Strike Team/Task Force                       Leader

--- ICS 1-2 ---
Modular Organization The ICS organizational structure develops in a modular fashion from the top down based on the size and complexity of the incident. Separate functional areas (Operations, Logistics, Planning, Finance/Admin.) may be established, each of which may be further subdivided to enhance internal organizational management and external coordination, depending on the needs and complexity of the incident. Responsibility for establishment and expansion of the ICS structure rests with the Incident Commander. This modular concept is based on the following considerations:    The ICS organization established matches the functions or tasks to be performed.    Staffing is made only for those functional elements required to perform the task    Span of control guidelines are maintained    The function of any non-activated organizational element is performed at the next highest level    Organizational elements are deactivated if they are no longer required. Management by Objectives Management by objectives is communicated throughout the entire ICS organization and includes:    Establishing incident priorities    Developing strategies based on incident objectives    Developing and issuing assignments, plans, procedures, and protocols.    Establishing specific, measurable tactics or tasks for various incident management functional activities, and directing efforts to accomplish them, in support of defined strategies.    Documenting results to measure performance and facilitate corrective actions. Incident Action Planning Centralized, coordinated incident action planning should guide all response activities. An Incident Action Plan (IAP) provides a concise, coherent means of capturing and communicating the overall incident priorities, objectives, strategies, and tactics in the context of both operational and support activities. Every incident must have an incident action plan. However, not all incidents require written plans. The need for written plans and attachments is based on the requirements of the incident and the decision of the Incident Commander (IC) or Unified Command (UC). Most initial response operations are not captured with a formal written IAP. However, if an incident is likely to extend beyond one operational period, become more complex, or involve multiple jurisdictions and/or agencies, preparing a written IAP will become increasingly important to maintain effective, efficient, and safe operations. (See ICS 4-0 Planning Section SOP for further information).
Manageable Span of Control Span of control refers to the number of personnel reporting to any given individual, and is key to effective and efficient incident management. The span of control of any individual with incident management supervisory responsibility should range from 3 to 7 subordinates, with 5 being optimal. A number of factors may influence span of control, including:    Training/experience of subordinates    Nature and complexity of the incident    Nature of the tasks, hazards, and safety factors    Timeframe of the incident Command officers must anticipate span of control problems and prepare for them early by expanding the ICS organizational structure appropriately. The positions of Safety, Liaison, PIO, Accountability and Staging are assistants to the IC and are not counted towards the IC’s span of control. Incident Facilities and Locations Various types of operational support facilities are established in the vicinity of an incident, depending on its size and complexity, to accomplish a variety of purposes. The IC will direct the identification and location of facilities based on the requirements of the situation. Typically designated facilities include Incident Command Posts, Bases, Camps, Staging Areas, mass casualty triage areas, and others as required. Comprehensive Resource Management Maintaining an accurate and up-to-date picture of resource utilization is a critical component of incident management and emergency response. Resources to be identified in this way include personnel, companies, crews, equipment, supplies, and facilities available or potentially available for assignment or allocation. Resource management may be accomplished using three different methods:    Single resources such as individual engines, trucks, water tenders, crews, etc.    A Task force is a group of any type or kind of resources, with common communications and a leader (i.e., two engines and a truck company).    A Strike team is a specified number of same kind and type of resources, with common communications and a leader (i.e., four engines). Knowledge of the status of resources is critical to effective resource management. All resources must be assigned a current status condition. All changes in location and/or status must be reported promptly to the resource’s ICS supervisor. (See ICS 4-0 Planning Section, Page 16, Resources Unit for information on resource status).
Integrated Communications Integrated communications involves managing communications at an incident through use of a common communications plan. The OPS 10-0 Communications Procedures SOP has been established using common terminology and clear text. Effective two -way communication is essential to effective incident management. Establishment and Transfer of Command The command function must be clearly established from the beginning of incident operations. The agency with primary jurisdictional authority over the incident designates the individu al at the scene responsible for establishing command. When command is transferred, the process must include a briefing that captures all essential information for continuing safe and effective operations, as well as acknowledgement between both parties that Command is being transferred and accepted. (See ICS 2-0 Incident Command and ICS 2-1 Command Procedures SOPs for further). Chain of Command and Unity of Command Chain of command refers to the orderly line of authority and reporting relationships within t he ranks of the incident management organization, with lower levels subordinate to, and connected to, higher levels. Chain of command is used to transmit formal communications such as orders, directives, resource requests, and assignment or status changes, as well as to maintain management control. Formal communication is used when:    Receiving and giving work assignments    Requesting support or additional resources    Reporting progress of assigned tasks. Although formal communications must flow through the chain of command, all members of the organization may directly communicate with each other to ask for or share information. (i.e., the Medial Transport Unit Leader calling Staging to ask how many ALS medic units are available, or the Roof Division asking Fire Attack if they need additional vertical ventilation.) Unity of command means that all individuals have a single designated supervisor to whom they report at the scene of the incident, and each individual maintains formal communication relationships only with that supervisor. These principles clarify reporting relationships and eliminate the confusion caused by multiple, conflicting directives. Incident managers at all levels must be able to direct the actions of all personnel under their supervision. Unified Command In incidents involving multiple jurisdictions, a single jurisdiction with multiagency involvement, or multiple jurisdictions with multiagency involvement, Unified Command allows agencies
with different legal, geographic, and functional authorities and responsibilities to work together effectively without affecting individual agency authority, responsibility, or accountability. Under the Unified Command concept, all involved agencies contribute to the command process. (See ICS 2-2 Unified Command SOP). Accountability Effective accountability of resources at all jurisdictional levels and within individual functional areas during incident operations is essential. To that end, clear assignments, Incident Action Planning, Unity of Command, Personal Responsibility, Span of Control, and Resource Tracking are the principles of accountability, which must be adhered to. (See also RDS 1 -1 Personnel Accountability SOP). Dispatch/Deployment Resources should respond only when requested or when dispatched by an a ppropriate authority through established resource management systems. Resources not requested must refrain from spontaneous deployment to avoid overburdening the recipient and compounding accountability challenges. Information and Intelligence Management The incident management organization must establish a process for gathering, analyzing, assessing, sharing, and managing incident-related information and intelligence.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 2-0 INCIDENT COMMAND REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED        AUTHOR          REVIEWED BY     APPROVED BY 1               New Format            Nov 2015       Langlois 888       Hunter 723       Hunter 723 INTRODUCTION The one function that always will be filled at every incident, regardless of size, is the Incident Commander's (IC's) position. The IC has the responsibility for overall management of the incident. INCIDENT COMMANDER The following list outlines the basic responsibilities of the IC at every incident. The IC may delegate authority for certain functions to others (Operations, Planning, Logistics, etc.), however he/she cannot delegate responsibility. Any function not specifically delegated to a subordinate is retained by the IC. Each of these responsibilities is discussed in detail in the following sections. Command Responsibilities     Assess the situation     Assess and address incident priorities     Determine objectives, strategies, and select/assign tactics     Develop an appropriate organizational structure     Develop an incident action plan (IAP)     Ensure personnel safety     Manage incident resources     Coordinate overall emergency activities     Coordinate activities of outside agencies     Authorize release of information to the news media Assess the Situation The IC must initially evaluate and continually assess the overall situation, including problems , risks and hazards. This responsibility continues throughout the incident as it continues to develop and change.

--- ICS 2-0 ---
Assess and Address Incident Priorities The IC is responsible for completion of these priorities. The three incident priorities, in order, are 1. Life safety 2. Incident stabilization 3. Property conservation Although the order of these priorities is crucial, it is not static. Undertaking certain life safety activities also may contribute to the goal of incident stabilization and/or property conservation. Clearly, however, even if an activity will contribute to life safety but not to property conservation, it must be implemented. #1 Life Safety The IC must consider and address life safety issues for all civilians, firefighters, and other emergency workers at an incident. No structure, vehicle, or any other form of property is worth the risk of even one life. Life safety must come before all other considerations. #2 Incident Stabilization The IC is responsible for determining the strategy that will minimize the impact of any incident on the surrounding area and his or her jurisdiction. #3 Property Conservation Property conservation means achieving our goals and objectives at an incident while minimizing the property damage. No incident can be managed successfully if property conservation is not given proper consideration and implemented in a timely manner. Determine Incident Objectives and Strategies, and Select/Assign Tactics The efforts of the resources available for handling any incident must be properly directed to address the incident priorities. This is accomplished when the IC determines the incident objectives and strategies for the incident and then transforms these strategies into obtainable, practical tactical operations. Incident objectives are statements identifying what is to be accomplished within a certain time period. Command is handled on three levels: Strategic, Tactical and Task:    Strategic: A function of the IC, Command Staff and the ICS General Staff which includes such things as addressing the incident priorities, establishing overall objectives, predicting outcomes (looking ahead), and allocating resources.    Tactical: Assigned by the IC to division/group supervisors (Tactical Officers) who coordinate and direct activities of single resources assigned to them (i.e.: Engine/Truck companies, etc.) toward accomplishing objectives within either a functional or geographical area of the incident.
   Tasks: Assigned to single resources. The task level is the actual work required to accomplish the tactics set by the division/group supervisors or the IC when tactical officers have not yet been assigned. See ICS 3-0 Operations Section for more detailed information on strategic, tactical and task level command positions. In order to address the immediate needs of the incident, the IC must prioritize the tactical operations to the most immediate concerns. This must be done so that the limited initial resources are assigned effectively. Objectives during the first few minutes of an incident may be limited, based on the initial responding resources available, but do not allow the incident to become “resource driven”; Incident objectives should determine resource needs. If you cannot accomplish a selected strategy because you don’t have enough resources; call for the additional resources needed to achieve the objective. It is also important to ensure that adequate reserves are maintained to meet anticipated demands (i.e., Rotation of personnel in and out of the hazard area, etc.). A good rule of thumb is: If all responding resources are going to be given an assignment and immediately go to work upon their arrival, leaving nothing in reserve, consider requesting additional resources.    Developing an Appropriate Organizational Structure o The organizational structure is developed based on the needs of the incident, while maintaining an appropriate span of control. Complex incidents should be divided up early.    Develop an Incident Action Plan (IAP) o The IAP is an organized course of events that addresses all phases of incident control within a specified time. (See ICS 4-0 Planning Section for more on the IAP).    Ensure Personnel Safety o The IC is ultimately responsible for the safety, accountability and wellbeing of all personnel, and as such the IC must continually evaluate the risk to personnel with respect to the purpose and potential results of their actions in each situation. All firefighters and officers are required to do a risk/benefit analysis of any and all tactical operations and report pertinent information in order to keep the IC informed. Risk benefit decisions are based on the following basic assessment criteria:    Activities that present a significant risk to the safety of personnel shall be limited to situations where there is a potential to save endangered lives. (Risk a lot to save a lot)
   Activities that are routinely employed to protect property shall be recognized as inherent risks to the safety of personnel, and actions shall be taken to reduce or avoid these risks. (Risk a little to save a little)    No risk to the safety of personnel shall be acceptable when there is no possibility to save lives or property. (Risk nothing to save nothing). Manage Incident Resources The IC is solely responsible for requesting, utilizing and releasing of whatever resources are required to meet the needs of the incident. Coordinate Overall Emergency Activities The IC is responsible for the organization and coordination of any and all activities that occur in response to the incident. Status Reports: To enable the IC to maintain awareness and coordination of overall incident activities, as well as the ability to complete continuous dynamic risk assessments, supervisory personnel operating within the Command structure shall, on a regular basis, report progress, or lack of progress, in meeting any strategic or tactical objectives, as well as any deviation from established plans. The IC, Operations Section Chief, or other ICS supervisor, must request status reports from their subordinate personnel on a pe riodic basis when these reports are not automatically given on a regular basis by those personnel. (See OPS 10-0 Communications, Status Reports for further information). Coordinate Activities of Outside Agencies The IC is responsible for requesting, coordinating with, and utilizing resources from outside agencies, including mutual-aid departments, public agencies, and private organizations that support the incident. Authorize Release of Information to the News Media The IC is responsible for the authorization and release of all official information regarding the incident. Type of Command Established Single Incident Commander When an incident occurs within a single jurisdiction and there is no jurisdictional or functional agency overlap, a single IC should be designated with overall incident management responsibility. This will be the most common type of command established.
Unified Command (UC) A UC will be established when more than one agency has incident jurisdiction or when incidents cross political jurisdictions. It allows all agencies/jurisdictions with responsibility for the incident to jointly provide management direction through a common set of objectives and strategies and a single IAP. (See ICS 2-2 Unified Command SOP for further information). Incident Command Post (ICP) Although ICPs may vary in type and size at different incidents, an ICP provides a central, stationary location to assist the IC in incident command and control. The ICP is a field office for management functions, such as gathering, analyzing, and disseminating information. Typically, one ICP is established for each incident. The ICP may initially begin as a company officer with a radio on the A side of a building, progress to a chief officer working out of their vehicle, and eventually end up in the mobile command post. The ICP must be clearly identified and its location announced over the radio. An ICP should provide a place where the IC can retain his or her sanity. It should be located in a non-hazard area, isolated from noise and confusion associated with the incident. It needs a status board and effective communications capability. A view of the incident is nice but not essential. The ICP must be large enough to provide sufficient working area for the potentially large number of individuals working there. Initially the ICP will be staffed by the IC and possibly an assistant (i.e., Accountability). The Command Staff and General Staff, when delegated, may also be located at the ICP. Together the IC and Command/General Staff make up the Incident Management Team (IMT). COMMAND STAFF In the ICS, the Command Staff includes an Incident Safety Officer (ISO), Public Information Officer (PIO), and a Liaison Officer, who report directly to the IC and may have assistants as necessary. The OFD also incorporates the position of Accountability. These positions assist the IC and do not count towards the IC’s span of control. Any Command Staff functions and authority not specifically delegated to other personnel are retained by the IC. Incident Safety Officer (ISO) The ISO monitors incident operations and advises the IC on all matters relating to operational safety, including the health and safety of emergency response personnel. (See ICS 2-3 Incident Safety Officer). Public Information Officer (PIO) The PIO is responsible for interfacing with the public and media and/or with other agencies with incident-related information requirements. The PIO gathers, verifies, coordinates, and disseminates accurate, accessible, and timely information on the incident’s cause, size, and
current situation; resources committed; and other matters of general interest for both internal and external audiences. The IC must approve the release of all incident-related information. Liaison Officer The Liaison Officer is the IC’s point of contact for representatives of other governmental agencies, non-governmental agencies, and the private sector (with no jurisdiction or legal authority) to provide input on their agency’s policies, resource availability, and other incident- related matters. In addition to the above listed Command Staff positions, the IC will also have the following assistant(s) available: Accountability Person(s) assigned as Accountability will be positioned at or near the ICP and will assist the IC by monitoring the accountability system, documenting information, tracking resources and assignments, and monitoring the designated TAC channel as well as the firefighter emergency channel of A-16. (See SWD 1-1 Personnel Accountability Procedures). GENERAL STAFF The General Staff is responsible for the functional aspects of the incident command structure. The General Staff typically consists of the Operations, Planning, Logistics, and Finance/Administration Section Chiefs. Any General Staff functions and authority not specifically delegated to other personnel are retained by the IC. Incident Management Team (IMT)
Operations Section This Section is responsible for all tactical activities focused on reducing the immediate hazard, saving lives and property, establishing situational control, and restoring normal operations. (See ICS 3-0 Operations Section for additional information). Planning Section The Planning Section collects, evaluates, and disseminates incident situation information and intelligence to the IC. This Section then prepares status reports, displays situation information, maintains the status of resources assigned to the incident, and prepares and documents the IAP, based on Operations Section input and guidance from the IC. (See ICS 4-0 Planning Section for additional information). Logistics Section The Logistics Section is responsible for all service support requirements needed to facilitate effective and efficient incident management, including ordering resources from off -incident locations. (See ICS 5-0 Logistics Section for additional information). Finance/Administration Section The Finance/Administration Section is established when the incident management activities require on scene or incident specific finance and other administrative support services. (See ICS 6-0 Finance/Administration Section for additional information).
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 2-1 COMMAND PROCEDURES REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1               New Format            Nov 2015       Langlois 888    McEvoy 680         Hunter 723 PURPOSE AND SCOPE In order to develop a well-orchestrated response to any incident scene, clear lines of authority, responsibility, and accountability must be defined. To this end the following procedure shall provide direction and authority for the Incident Command (IC) function. Command procedures are designed to accomplish the following:     Fix the responsibility for COMMAND on a specific individual.     Establish strong, direct, and visible COMMAND as early as possible in the operation.     Establish an effective framework for activities and responsibilities.     Provide a system for the orderly transfer of COMMAND to subsequent arriving authorities. Establishing Command The first fire department member or highest ranking officer/acting officer on the first arriving apparatus/unit at the incident shall assume command of the incident. The initial IC shall remain in Command until Command is officially passed/transferred to another on -scene officer, or the incident is stabilized and terminated. When an engine company arrives at the same time or just behind a truck company, it is preferable that the engine Captain should assume Command. When a Chief Officer arrives at the scene at the same time as the initial arriving company, the Chief Officer shall assume Command. The initial IC shall:     Perform an initial size up.     Assume and announce Command as well as transmit a Brief Initial Report (BIR) (See OPS 10-0 Communications SOP).     Complete a Dynamic Risk Assessment, including a 360 of the building if possible.     Establish incident objectives and strategies, develop an IAP, and give tactical assignments to dispatched and/or available resources.     Begin to develop an appropriate and effective ICS organization.     Determine the need for, and request, additional resources as needed.     Review, evaluate, and revise (as needed) the IAP.     Provide for the continuity, transfer, and termination of Command.

--- ICS 2-1 ---
The radio designation “COMMAND” will be used along with the location of the incident (i.e., Farnam St. Command, Quest Center Command, etc.) This designation will not change throughout the duration of the incident. Passing Command In certain situations, it may be necessary for a first arriving officer to pass Command to the next engine company officer that arrives ON THE SCENE. This will typically occur when the initial arriving officer goes into a Working Command mode (See Command Options on page 6.) “Passing Command” to a unit that is NOT on scene creates a gap in the command process and compromises incident management and safety. To prevent this “gap”, COMMAND SHALL NOT BE PASSED TO AN OFFICER WHO IS NOT ON THE SCENE. It is preferable to have the initial arriving officer continue to operate as a “Working Command” until Command can be passed to an on-scene unit. Until Command is successfully passed or transferred to another ON SCENE officer, and that ON SCENE officer acknowledges the assumption of Command, the initial arriving officer retains all Command responsibilities and continues to function as the IC. When the decision is made by the initial arriving officer to engage in a Working Command mode, he/she may decide to announce their desire to Pass Command to the next arriving officer, upon that officer’s arrival ON THE SCENE. Command can only be passed ONCE. Passing command may be achieved with the following communications procedure as outlined in the OPS 10-0 Communications Procedures SOP:    The initial arriving officer shall assume command and announce during the BIR that he/she “Will need to pass Command” to the next arriving officer upon their arrival    This announcement alerts the next arriving officer to be in the “order-giving” mode rather than the “order-receiving” mode.    Upon arrival of the next officer, that officer will contact the first arriving officer via radio and confirm their arrival. The first arriving officer (who is in the Working Command mode) will confirm that they are now passing command to the on scene second arriving officer and give that officer as much “transfer of command” information as possible.    The second arriving officer shall acknowledge the transfer information and announce that they are now assuming Command of the incident. Since Command can only be passed once, the second arriving officer MUST assume Command and initiate the Command mode. (See Command Options on page 7). When Command is passed, it is preferable for the second arriving Engine Captain to assume Command, rather than the Truck Captain. Transfer of Command Transfer of Command refers to the act of one individual relieving another individual of authority, responsibility, and accountability as it pertains to the execution of the function of
the IC at any given incident. Command is transferred to improve the quality of the ICS organization. The initial IC shall retain Command, even when he/she announces that Command will need to be passed, until formally relieved by another on scene officer. Ranking officers shall have the discretionary authority to relieve a subordinate officer of Command or to allow that officer to retain it, and instead assume an “advisory” role. The arrival of a ranking offic er on the scene DOES NOT mean that Command has been automatically transferred to that officer. Command is only transferred when the outlined transfer of Command process has been completed. However, if the ranking officer present at the scene makes the deci sion to allow a subordinate officer to retain Command, the ranking officer assumes responsibility and accountability for everything at the incident, regardless of whether or not they formally assume Command, by virtue of their rank and presence on scene. At all times, the IC has complete formal authority and responsibility for the incident. If a higher ranking officer wants to affect a change in the management of an incident, they must first be physically on scene, and then utilize the transfer of Command procedures outlined here. When at all possible, the officer assuming Command will communicate face to face with the person being relieved. (See OPS 10-0 Communications SOP for Transfer of Command communications report). The person being relieved will brief the officer assuming Command of at least the following information:    Current situation    Location and assignment of resources    Status of current control efforts    Anticipated course of incident    Injuries/victims    Other pertinent info. The person being relieved of Command should review the tactical worksheet with the officer assuming Command. The person being relieved of Command will be assigned to best advantage by the officer assuming Command. Whenever a transfer of Command occurs, the change in the IC must be announced over the radio. Size Up The initial arriving IC is faced with the need to make proper and reasonable decisions under the immediate pressure of the emergency. A size-up system becomes a vital and necessary tool to have in this situation. This same system is also necessary for subsequent IC's as their need to make decisions varies with the dynamics of the incident. The following five - point size-up system lists considerations that should be made in the mind of the IC when arriving at an incident. Also related, see the OPS 10-0 Communications SOP for information on the Brief Initial Report (BIR) made on the radio upon arrival.
1. FACTS (actual observed facts that the situation presents) a. Dispatch Information b. Time of the Incident c. Location of the incident. d. Nature of the incident. e. Hazards f. Exposures. g. Building- Occupancy/Construction, Fire protection systems, Access, etc. h. Smoke/Fire Conditions and location i. Weather. 2. PROBABILITIES (predictions based upon the existing situation and available information). a. Rescue Profile b. Extent of the incident. c. Location and possible extension of the fire d. Where is the incident going from here? 3. OWN SITUATION (your resources and capabilities). a. Personnel staffing and equipment on scene/responding. b. Need and/or availability of additional resources. c. Available water supply. d. Any actions already taken. 4. DECISION a. Risk assessment b. Appropriate strategic mode. (Offensive/Defensive) c. Determine objectives and strategy. d. Evaluate tactical options. e. Select tactics. 5. PLAN OF OPERATION a. Issue tactical assignments. b. Coordinate activities. c. Evaluate results. d. Alter activities as necessary. Risk Assessment and Management As a part of the initial and ongoing decision making process, the IC shall integrate risk assessment and management into the regular functions of incident command. Through maintenance of situational awareness and continuous dynamic risk assessments, the IC shall evaluate the risk to members with respect to the purpose and potential results of their actions in each situation.
In addition, risk management principles shall be routinely employed by all supervisory personnel at all levels of the incident command system to define the limits of acceptable and unacceptable positions and functions for all personnel at the incident scene. All personnel are responsible for their own safety and the safety of other personnel working with them. All personnel, regardless of rank, are responsible for identifying risks and hazards and reporting them. (See also ICS 2-0 page 3 “Command Responsibilities: Ensure Personnel Safety”). “Situational awareness” applies to everyone on the incident and is the perception of what the incident is doing and what you are doing in relation to the incident and your objectives. It involves an awareness of potential incident behavior and the ability to predict where the incident, and you, will be in the future. It depends both on individual perception and sharing it with the rest of the team, and involves these actions:    Identify problems or potential problems    Recognize the need for action    Identify deviations from the expected and do not ignore information discrepancies; rather, analyze discrepancies before proceeding.    Seek and provide information before acting    Continue collecting information about the incident and assignments made    Communicate your situational awareness to all team members (See ICS 1-1 Incident Command Definitions, page 4 for Crew Resource Management (CRM) information). Strategic Mode It is the IC’s responsibility to determine the appropriate overall strategic mode (offensive or defensive) for the incident. Strategic mode should be viewed more as a strategy, rather than a certain position or location (interior/exterior). Offensive Mode: Strategic mode where personnel take direct action to mitigate the problem/hazards. (ATTACK) Defensive Mode: Strategic mode where personnel remain outside the hazard area and work to confine the hazard/problem to the area where it currently exists in order to prevent it from extending to uninvolved areas (DEFEND).
Risk Assessment/Strategic Mode Decision Matrix Command Options At most incidents the initial IC will be a Company Officer. If a Chief Officer, member, or unit without tactical capabilities (i.e., Training or Inspector’s car, no equipment, etc.) initiates Command, sizing up the scene and the establishment of an Incident Command Post should be top priorities.. The following command options define the Company Officer’s direct involvement in tactical activities and the modes of command that may be utilized. When Command is initially assumed by a company officer that officer must decide on an appropriate commitment for his/her company that will usually fall into one of the three general modes listed below. Nothing Showing Mode: These situations generally require investigation by the initial arriving company while other units remain in staging. The company officer should go with the company to investigate while utilizing a portable radio to command the incident as the IC. Working Command Mode: Working Command indicates that the initial IC has been required to actively participate in task level operations, but will continue to function as the IC. In these situations the Company Officer goes with the crew while utilizing a portable radio to command the incident as the IC (Working Command). This mode acknowledges the fact that there are some situations where the initial arriving officer must combine command and action. (i.e., The officer is physically needed to get an initial attack hose line advanced and in service, the experience level of the other crew members requires the officer to directly supervise the attack crew in the hazard area, etc.) An officer in the Working Command mode is still responsible for Command functions such as a rapid initial size-up and risk assessment, a
BIR, and giving assignments to the next arriving companies. This mode is designed to combine the benefit of a fast, well-placed attack with the command and control of a highly engaged company officer performing as the initial Incident Commander. This mode should not last more than a few minutes and will end with one of the following results:    Situation is stabilized    Command is passed to the next arriving officer upon that officer’s arrival.    Command is transferred to a higher ranking officer. When Command is transferred to a Chief Officer, the Chief Officer may opt to return the Company Officer to his/her crew, or assign him/her to a subordinate ICS position.    The situation is not stabilized and the Company Officer must withdraw to the exterior and establish an Incident Command Post (See Command Mode below). In this situation, the Company Officer must decide whether or not to withdraw the remainder of the crew, based on staffing, crew capabilities and experience, safety issues, and the ability to communicate with the crew. Should a situation occur during a “Working Command” where a later arriving Company or Chief Officer cannot locate or communicate with Command (after several radio attempts), they will announce their assumption of Command and initiate whatever actions are necessary to confirm the safety of the missing crew. Command Mode: Certain incidents, by virtue of their size, complexity, or potential for rapid expansion, require immediate strong, direct, overall command. In these cases, the Company Officer will initially assume an exterior, effective command position, establish an ICP, and maintain that position until Command is transferred to a higher ranking officer. A tactical worksheet shall be initiated and utilized to assist in managing this type of incident. (See ICS 3-2 IFAW & TWS Worksheets). When this mode is selected, the following options are available regarding the assignment of the remaining crew members:    A senior member may “move up” within the company, assume the position of acting Captain, and place the company into action. (Example: The Captain of Engine 43 becomes the IC, and a senior Engine 43 firefighter becomes the acting Engine 43 Captain). The collective and individual capabilities and experience of the crew will regulate this action.    The Company Officer may assign the crew members to work under the supervision of another Company Officer. In such cases, it is important that the Company Officer assuming Command communicates with the Company officer of the other company to indicate the assignment of those personnel.    The Company Officer may elect to assign the crew members to perform staff functions to assist the IC.
An initial arriving Company Officer assuming Command at an incident has a choice of modes and degrees of personal involvement in the tactical/task activities, but continues to be fully responsible for the IC functions.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 2-2 UNIFIED COMMAND REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1               New Format            Nov 2015       Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 PURPOSE Unified Command (UC) is an important element in multi-jurisdictional or multi-agency incident management. It provides guidelines to enable agencies with different legal, geographic, and functional responsibilities to coordinate, plan, and interact effectively. As a team effort, UC allows all agencies with jurisdictional authority or functional responsibility for the incident to jointly provide management direction through a common set of incident objectives and strategies and a single IAP. Each participating agency maintains its authority, responsibility, and accountability. A UC MAY BE USED WHEN:     Incidents impact more than one political jurisdiction.     Incidents involve multiple agencies or departments within the same political jurisdiction     Incidents impact or involve several adjacent political jurisdictions and their functional agencies Within a UC, one person is selected as spokesperson for the group. Typically, the person representing the agency with the highest resource commitment or most visible activity on the incident is selected. In some cases, this task may simply be assigned to the person with the most experience. The UC spokesperson does not make independent command decisions, but does provide a single voice for the UC as well as a point of contact, as necessary, for the Command and General Staff functions. The exact composition of the UC structure will depend on the location(s) of the incident (i.e., which geographical jurisdictions or organizations are involved) and the type of incident (i.e., which functional agencies of the involved jurisdiction(s) or organization(s) are required). UC functions as a single integrated management organization, which involves:     Co-located command at the Incident Command Post (ICP).     One Operations Section Chief to direct tactical efforts     A coordinated process for resource ordering     Shared planning, logistical, and finance/administration functions, wherever possible.     Coordinated approval of information and releases.

--- ICS 2-2 ---
All agencies in the UC structure contribute to the process of:    Selecting objectives    Determining overall incident strategies    Ensuring that joint planning for tactical activities is accomplished in accordance with approved incident objectives.    Ensuring the integration of tactical operations    Approving, committing, and making optimum use of all assigned resources. The designated agency officials participating in the UC represent different legal authorities and functional areas of responsibility and use a collaborative process to establish, identify, and rank incident priorities and to determine appropriate objectives consistent with the priorities. Agency officials in the UC MUST be physically co-located together at a single ICP in order to make command decisions together and share information. Agencies that are involved in the incident but lack jurisdictional responsibility or authority are defined as supporting and/or assisting agencies. They are represented in the command structure and effect coordination on behalf of their parent agency through the Liaison Officer. Jurisdictional responsibilities of multiple incident management officials are consolidated into a single planning process that includes:    Responsibilities for incident management    Incident objectives    Resource availability and capabilities    Limitations    Areas of agreement and disagreement between agency officials. Incidents are managed under a single collaborative approach that includes:    Common organizational structure    Single Incident Command Post    Unified planning process    Unified resource management Under UC, the IAP is assembled by the Planning Section and is approved by the UC. A single individual, the Operations Section Chief, must have full authority to direct th e tactical implementation of the IAP. The Operations Section Chief will usually come from the organization with the greatest jurisdictional involvement. UC participants will agree on the designation of the Operations Section Chief. UC incorporates the following principles:    One set of objectives is developed for the entire incident.    A collective approach to developing strategies to achieve incident goals.
   Improved information flow and coordination between all jurisdictions and agencies involved in the incident.    All agencies with responsibility for the incident have an understanding of one another's priorities and restrictions.    No agency's authority or legal requirements will be compromised or neglected.    Each agency is fully aware of the plans, actions and constraints of all others.    The combined efforts of all agencies are optimized as they perform their respective assignments under a single Incident Action Plan.    Command speaks with one voice. Duplicative efforts are reduced or eliminated, thus reducing cost and chances for frustration and conflict. Multiagency/Single Jurisdiction UC Incident Multijurisdictional UC Incident
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 2-3 INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED       AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1              New Format             Nov 2015        Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 2           Radio Terminology         Nov 2017         Ryan 679       McCormick 638        Olsen 640 PURPOSE NFPA 1561 (Standard on Emergency Services Incident Management System) requires that, “The function of incident scene safety shall be carried out at all incidents. It is the responsibility of the IC, who cannot perform this function due to the size or complexity of the incident, to assign or request response of a safety officer to fill this function”. BACKGROUND The IC is ultimately responsible for firefighter safety. While the IC shall always retain responsibility for overall firefighter safety, when the size or complexity of the incident dictates it, the IC may delegate and assign duties and authority for incident scene safety to another officer, who shall fulfill the Command Staff function of Incident Safety Officer. OPS 10-0 Communication Procedures states that a second Battalion Chief will be dispatched on all Fire I and Fire II dispatches. This second Battalion Chief may be assigned as the ISO, or to some other strategic or tactical level position at the discretion of the IC, based on the needs of the incident, in which case a later arriving officer can assume the position of ISO. Duties and Responsibilities of the ISO: Overall, the ISO shall monitor conditions, activities, and operations to determine whether they fall within the following risk assessment criteria:   Activities that present a significant risk to the safety of personnel shall be limited to situations where there is a potential to save endangered lives. (Risk a lo t to save a lot)  Activities that are routinely employed to protect property shall be recognized as inherent risks to the safety of personnel, and actions shall be taken to reduce or avoid these risks. (Risk a little to save a little)  No risk to the safety of personnel shall be acceptable when there is no possibility to save lives or property. (Risk nothing to save nothing). When the ISO observes or becomes aware of an imminent threat or hazard to firefighter safety, he/she shall be authorized to stop, alter or suspend those activities. As a result, the

--- ICS 2-3 ---
ISO shall immediately inform the IC of any actions taken to correct imminent hazards, as well as any appropriate tactical level officers. When the ISO observes or becomes aware of unsafe conditions, operations, or hazards that do not present an imminent threat to personnel, the ISO shall take appropriate action through the IC to mitigate or eliminate the unsafe condition, operation, or hazard. The ISO shall refrain from becoming involved in and/or directing regular incident operations (except as outlined above for imminent threats/hazards). The ISO shall work through the IC for all other purposes. Assistant Incident Safety Officers The ISO may also request, from the IC, the assignment of Assistant Safety Officers (ASO) to assist with monitoring incident scene safety. Any ASO shall have the same authority as the ISO to address imminent threats or hazards to firefighter safety.    When involved with a special operations incident (haz-mat, technical rescue, water rescue, etc.), or other type of specialized response, where the designated ISO does not meet the technician-level requirements of the incident, the ISO shall request, and the IC shall appoint, an assistant safety officer who meets the technician-level requirements, to assist with incident safety officer functions. ALL Incidents At all emergency incidents, the ISO shall:    Don all appropriate personal protective clothing and equipment relevant to the incident.    Upon arrival, proceed to the command post and meet face-to-face with the IC. The ISO shall receive an Incident Action Plan (IAP) from the IC, and provide a risk assessment of the incident scene operations. o Ensure that Command has been established and the IC is clearly identified.    Announce that he/she is assuming “SAFETY” and ensure that they are clearly identifiable by donning lime green Incident Safety Officer ICS vest.    Complete a walk-around (360) of the incident if possible.    Develop a safety plan for the incident. Meet with and make recommendations to the IC to ensure/improve safety at the incident.    Monitor conditions, activities, and operations for perceived risks that fall below the risk assessment criteria as outlined above, and shall take action when appropriate. o Use of appropriate personal protective equipment by all personnel.    Monitor and report status of conditions, hazards, and risks to the IC. o Be the eyes and ears of the IC
   Ensure the establishment of safety zones, collapse zones, hot zones, and other hazard areas, and communicate these to all members present.    Ensure the Personnel Accountability System is being used. (See SWD 1-1 Personnel Accountability Procedures). o Monitor the assignment and location of all resources. o IFAW/TWA/Accountability Control Board being used? (See ICS 3-2 IFAW & TWS Worksheets) o SEMS being monitored? Are PASS device activations being immediately addressed? o Personnel Accountability Reports (PARs) requested by IC at regular intervals or during/after significant events? (See OPS 10-0 Communication Procedures)    Monitor radio transmissions. Stay alert for missed, unclear, or incomplete communications. o Monitor the assigned TAC channel and A-16 for MAYDAY transmissions.    Ensure that incident rehabilitation for personnel is addressed.    Survey and evaluate the hazards associated with a landing zone and interface with helicopters.    Ensure air management policy is being followed when personnel are operating in any hazardous atmosphere. (See SOP OPS 6-1 Personnel Air Management). o Monitor for and immediately address the sound of low air alarms in the hazardous atmosphere.    Ensure that an ALS transport medic unit is available on scene for operating personnel. Fire Suppression Incidents At all fire suppression incidents, the ISO shall:    Ensure that a Rapid Intervention Crew (RIC) is available and ready. o The RIC should be pro-active on the fireground, but should not become engaged in fire suppression/incident mitigation duties that would cause them to be less than immediately ready to respond to a firefighter emergency. o Upon RIC deployment, ensure a backup RIC is assigned, available, and ready.    Monitor and advise IC of hazards, collapse potential, and fire extension    Monitor and evaluate smoke and fire conditions and advise IC on potential for a hostile fire event that could endanger operating personnel.    Ensure adequate number and accessibility of entry and egress points for personnel conducting interior operations.
   RIC should be pro-actively addressing this concern by softening the structure. •   Ensure hazardous energy is addressed/controlled o Utilities    Evaluate, at every ten (10) minute time check, the following: o Strategic mode (offensive/defensive) o Burn time o Structural stability o   Air supply of interior crews EMS Incidents At all EMS incidents, the ISO shall:    Ensure compliance with SWD 5-0 Exposure Control Plan.    Ensure Critical Incident Stress Management is established as needed, especially for Mass Casualty Incidents.
OMAHA FIRE DEPARTMENT INCIDENT SAFETY OFFICER CHECKLIST The Incident Safety Officer (ISO) shall monitor and assess the incident for existing or potential hazards and develop measures for ensuring personnel safety ISO’s ROLE                 EMS RESPONSE                FIRE SUPPRESSION O Obtain Briefing (IAP)       O Scene Security               O Rescue & Life Safety O Command Established?        O Risk Evaluation              O SCBA & PPE O Walk-around (360)           O Violent Acts                 O Smoke & Fire Conditions O Develop Safety Plan         O Infection Control            O Building Construction O Hazard Identification       O PPE                          O RIC Ready & Available O Make Recommendations        O Hazard Assessment            O Burn Time (10 minutes) O Monitor Radio MAYDAY        O Helicopter Safety            O Fire Involv/Flame Spread O Establish Safety Zones      O Additional Resources         O Access/Egress Points O Accountability System       O Multi-Casualty               O Offensive/Defensive O Air Management              O Communicable Diseases        O Size of Hoselines O Rehab                       O Critical Incident Stress     O Coordinated Ventilation O EMS Available               O                              O Hostile Fire Event O Heli Landing Zone Safety    O                              O Extension O Collapse/Stability HAZ-MAT OPS              SPECIAL OPERATIONS            O Utilities O Asst. ISO- Haz-Mat Tech     O Asst. ISO - Special Ops      O Fatigue O Safety Officer Assigned     O Trench Rescue                O O Zones Established /         O Water Rescue                 O Communicated O Site Safety Plan      O High-Angle Rescue                  O O                       O Confined Space O                       O Building Collapse                      MISCELLANEOUS O High Rise Building Fire            O Command Post ID POST INCIDENT ANALYSIS O Aircraft Crash/Fire/Resc.           O Staging Area O Training Bureau       O Wildland/Brush Fire                O Additional Resources O Documentation         O Technical Expert Request           O Special Equipment O Set Date and Time     O                                    O Establish Priorities O Facilitate Meeting    O                                    O Scene Security O Lessons Learned                                            O Span of Control O Changes of Procedures                                      O Primary/Sec. Search O Training Deficiencies                                      O Peds/Infants O O NOTES:
OFD INCIDENT SAFETY PLAN Type of Incident __________________ Command Name__________________________ Address _____________________________________TAC Channel___________ Site Assessment: Terrain and Accessibility ___________________________________________________ Wind Direction and Speed __________________________________________________ Weather Factors at the Incident ______________________________________________ Incident Management System: Location of Command Post _________________________________________________ Initial Resources __________________________________________________________ Secondary Resources _____________________________________________________ Deployment of Resources Div. ___Unit(s) _________ Group ______Unit(s) _______ Group ______Units(s)______ Div. ___Unit(s)_________ Group ______Unit(s)_______ Group ______Units(s)______ Div. ___Unit(s)_________ Group ______Unit(s)_______ Group ______Units(s)______ Location of Staging Area ___________________________________________________ Location of Rehab Area ____________________________________________________ Asst. ISO (s) & Assignments________________________________________________ Outside Resources:_____________________________________________________ ___ Hazardous Conditions: Identify any Hazardous Conditions ___________________________________________ Risk Assessment _________________________________________________________ (Severe, Moderate, Low) Probability of Increase of Risk (Forecasting) ___________________________________ (High, Medium, Low) PAR_______ Time:_______ PAR:_______ Time:______ PAR ______ Time:_______ Received an Incident Action Plan from the Incident Commander Strategy ________________________________________________________________ (Rescue Mode, Offensive, Defensive, No Action) Recommendations on Strategy _______________________________________________ Tactics _________________________________________________________________ Risk Assessment of Tactics _________________________________________________ Recommendations on Tactics _______________________________________________ Safety Considerations: Personnel Accountability System Implemented _________________________________ Control Zones Established __________________________________________________ Rapid Intervention Crews Established _________________________________________ Rehab Established ________________________________________________________ EMS - Medical at Scene and Location_________________________________________ Evaluate Traffic Hazards and Apparatus Placement ______________________________ Establish Safety/Collapse Zones: _______________Time into incident_______________ Recommendations: ________________________________________________________________________
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 2-4 AREA COMMAND REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION      DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1              New Format             Nov 2015       Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 PURPOSE Area Command is an organization level of ICS, configured to oversee the management of multiple incidents, handled individually by separate ICS organizations, or to oversee the management of a very large or evolving incident engaging multiple Incident Management Teams (IMTs). An agency Administrator/Executive (i.e., Mayor or City Manager) or other public official with jurisdictional responsibility for the incident, usually makes the decision to establish an Area Command. An Area Command is activated only if necessary, depending on the complexity of the incident and incident management span-of-control considerations. The function of Area Command is to develop broad objectives for the impacted area and to coordinate the development of individual incident objectives and strategies. These responsibilities include ensuring that conflicts are resolved, incident objectives established, and strategies selected for the use of critical resources. The Area Command organization operates under the same basic ICS principles, but does NOT in any way replace the incident - level ICS organizations or functions. Area Commands are particularly relevant to incidents that are typically not site specific, are not immediately identifiable, are geographically dispersed, and evolve over longer periods of time (e.g., public health emergencies, earthquakes, tornadoes, floods, civil disturbances, and any geographic area where several IMTs are being used and these incidents are all requesting similar resources). Incidents such as these, as well as acts of biological, chemical, radiological, and nuclear terrorism, require a coordinated intergovernmental, non - governmental, and private-sector response, with large-scale coordination typically conducted at a higher jurisdictional level. Area Command is also used when a number of incidents of the same type in the same area are competing for the same resources, such as multiple hazardous material incidents, spills, fires. If the incidents under the authority of the Area Command span multiple jurisdictions, a Unified Area Command should be established. This allows each jurisdiction to have appropriate representation in the Area Command.

--- ICS 2-4 ---
For incidents under its authority, an Area Command has the following responsibilities:    Develop broad objectives for the impacted area(s)    Coordinate the development of individual incident objectives and strategies    (Re)allocate resources as the established priorities change.    Ensure that incidents are properly managed.    Ensure effective communications    Ensure that incident management objectives are met and do not conflict with each other or with agency policies    Identify critical resource needs and report them to the established Emergency Operations Center (EOC)/Multi-Agency Coordination (MAC) Group.    Ensure that short-term “emergency” recovery is coordinated to assist in the transition to full recovery operations.    Coordinate demobilization of assigned resources. IMT #1                        IMT #2                      IMT #3
Resource Allocation When established, Area Command will determine if the dispatch center will continue to allocate resources directly to the incident tactical areas being run by the individual IMTs, or to a location(s) from which Area Command can dispatch the resources into the identified tactical areas. If the resources are to be allocated to a location from which Area Command will dispatch the resources, the dispatch center will give all reported emergency calls received from within the affected tactical area to the Area Command. One of the most important responsibilities of the Area Command is resource prioritization by maintaining the overall “big picture”. When resources are limited, and resource requests from the IMT’s exceed the currently available resources, the Area Command must decide, based on situational information and incident priorities, which incident gets the resources first. Area Command Location To the extent possible, the Area Command should be established in close proximity to the incidents under its authority. This makes it easier for the Area Commander and the individual ICs to meet and otherwise interact. However, it is best not to co-locate an Area Command with any individual ICP. Doing so might cause confusion with the Command and management activities associated with that particular incident. The facility used to house the organization should be large enough to accommodate a full Area Command staff, as well as meetings. Reporting Relationships When an Area Command is involved in coordinating multiple IMTs, the following reporting relationships will apply:    The ICs for the incidents under the Area Commander’s authority report to the Area Commander.    The Area Commander is accountable to the agency(s) or to the jurisdictional executive(s) or administrator(s).  If the incidents under the authority of the Area Command span multiple jurisdictions, a Unified Area Command should be established. This allows each jurisdiction to have appropriate representation in the Area Command.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 3-0 OPERATIONS SECTION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION        DATE REVISED    AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 2          Division clarifications     July 2016    Langlois 888     Hunter 723        Hunter 723 Resources and division 3                                      April 2019   Langlois 888     McCaw 897         Olsen 640 clarifications PURPOSE The Operations Section is responsible for management of all tactical operations directed toward reducing the immediate hazard at the incident site, saving lives and property, establishing situation control, and restoring normal conditions. If major functio nal authority for General Staff positions, such as the Operations Section, is not delegated, the IC retains authority and responsibility for performing all of those functions. IMPLEMENTING THE OPERATIONS SECTION Operations is implemented when the IC is faced with a complex incident having major demands in one or more of the remaining major functional areas. The most common reason for staffing Operations is to relieve span-of-control problems for the IC. These span-of- control problems occur when the number of Branches, Divisions, and Groups, coupled with Planning and/or Logistic Section elements, exceeds the IC's ability to manage effectively. The IC may implement the Operations Section to reduce the span of control, transferring the direct management of all tactical activities to the Operations Section. The IC then is able to focus attention on the overall management of the entire incident as well as to interact with the Command Staff and General Staff. A complex incident, in which the IC needs assistance determining strategies and tactics, also may require implementing Operations. However, Operations should be staffed only to improve the management of the incident. If it is not used to maintain a manageable workload or an effective span of control, the IC could end up with a span of control of one. After Operations is implemented, the duties of the IC are modified slightly. Operations will be responsible for all tactical operations, resources, and accomplishment of specific activities. The IC will be responsible for the development of the incident strategy and the communication of that strategy to the Operations Section Chief. Operations Section Chief The IC sets the overall plan and strategic priorities. The Operations Section Chief directly manages all incident tactical activities and implements the IAP. The Operations Chief selects

--- ICS 3-0 ---
and prioritizes the accomplishment of the objectives. As a part of this overall responsibility, the Operations Section Chief’s responsibilities include:    Manage tactical operations as follows:    Interact with subordinate positions (Branch or Division/Group) to develop the    operations portion of the IAP    Request resources needed to implement and support the operation’s tactics as a part of the IAP    Assists the IC in development and continuous dynamic assessment of the operations portion of the IAP    Supervise the execution of the IAP for operations, including:    Maintain close contact with subordinate positions    Ensure safe tactical operations    Approve release of resources from assigned status (not release from incident)    Make or approve expedient changes to the IAP during the operational period as necessary.    Maintain close communication with the IC. The Incident Commander may assign alternate or additional duties to the Operations Section Chief according to the needs of a specific incident. Tactical Direction Tactical direction describes what must be accomplished within the selected strategy in order to achieve the incident objectives, and is the responsibility of the IC/Ops Chief. Tactical direction consists of the following steps:    Establish Tactics: Determine the tactics needed to implement the selected strategy.    Assign Resources: Determine and assign the kind and type of resources appropriate for the selected tactics.    Monitor Performance: Monitoring the performance of the resources to successfully achieve the tactical assignments will determine if the tactics and resources selected for the various strategies are both valid and adequate. If not, alternatives will have to be evaluated. Staging The purpose of Staging is to provide a standard system of resource placement prior to those resources receiving tactical assignments. Failure to use such a system will result in added confusion and freelancing by units arriving and determining their own tactical assignments. The IC/Ops Chief will lose track of their resources resulting in poorly applied resources, priorities being overlooked, duplication of tactics, the inability to oversee personnel safety, and a general lack of accountability. In all cases, resources shall not commit themselves to tactical operations without an assignment from the IC, unless otherwise specifically outlined in OFD SOPs. The following procedures address Level I and Level II staging.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                ICS 3-0    Level I Staging: Automatically used by all responding companies up to and including a full first-alarm assignment, regardless of the type of incident. o The first arriving engine, truck, and chief officer will proceed to the address side of the building or incident, unless otherwise directed by the initial arriving IC. o If a medic unit is dispatched to the incident, it will also proceed to the address side and position itself in a way to allow access for other incoming apparatus and ensure an unobstructed exit from the scene. o All other responding apparatus will stop, in their direction of travel, approximately one block away from the incident. Engine companies will preferably stop near an available hydrant. o Responding units that automatically go into Level I staging will report over the radio their arrival, identification, Level I staging status, approximate location and any available water supply information if appropriate. (i.e., “Engine 42 on location, Level I staging, 108th & Fort at a red top hydrant”). o In all cases, responding units will respond, arrive, and position themselves in accordance with direction and/or assignments from the IC.    Level II Staging: Used by all responding resources beyond the initial first-alarm assignment, or as directed by the IC. o Level II staging area shall be an area suitable to park, organize, and coordinate the anticipated response of additional resources that is away from the immediate incident area but close enough to allow for quick deployment of those resources to the incident. o Upon requesting additional resources (i.e., multiple alarms), the IC shall inform the dispatcher of the designated location of the staging area. When dispatching the additional resources, they will be directed, by the dispatcher, to respond to the designated Level II staging area. o The first Company Officer to arrive at the Level II staging area, and without orders to the contrary, shall assume the position of Staging Area Manager, referred to as “Staging” o Communications to and from the incident and the staging area shall be directly between the IC/Ops Chief and the Staging Area Manager. Requests for assignment of resources from Staging shall be directed from the IC/Ops Chief to the Staging Area Manager. No resource shall take any action except as directed by the Staging Area Manager. o Duties of the Staging Area Manager:  Identification of Staging area by use of apparatus warning lights. All other apparatus shall turn off all lights.  Log in and track all available resources in Staging. Keep the IC/Ops Chief apprised of the level of available resources. (See OFD Form 58 Staging Officer Worksheet)  Ensure that resources are parked in such a manner as to facilitate access and egress.  Assign and dispatch resources from the Staging area as directed by the IC/Ops Chief.
   When directed by the IC/Ops Chief, maintain a certain level of available resources in Staging. When available resources drop below this level, the Staging Area Manager will request additional resources from Dispatch.    Coordinate with police to ensure access and security of the Staging area. STANDARD RESOURCE RESPONSIBILITIES AND CAPABILITIES Standard resource responsibilities assign basic incident functions and tactics to the various kinds of resources based on their capabilities and characteristics. Major fire ground functions or tactics are typically assigned to those resources that can best accomplish them. For instance, usually the best resource to assign to attack the fire is typically an engine company, while a truck company is typically the most appropriate resource to assign to vertical ventilation. The following items represent the standard responsibilities and capabilities that will normally be expected of OFD resources. However, this does not limit a resource/company only to those tactics listed. Every resource/company will be expected to perform all basic tactics safely, within the limits of their capabilities. It is the IC/Ops. Chief’s responsibility to integrate tactics and functions as required by the incident, with the on-scene resources. Engine Company:           Fire Attack (Locate, Confine & Extinguish all fire) Search/Rescue                   EMS: Triage/Treatment Water Supply                    Exposure Protection Rapid Intervention Truck Company:            Search/Rescue                       Control Utilities Ventilation                         Aerial Operations Scene Lighting                      Vehicle Extrication Forcible Entry/Access/Ladders       Salvage & Overhaul EMS: Triage/Treatment               Rapid Intervention Rescue Company:           Rapid Intervention            Hazardous Materials Technical Rescue (Rope/Trench/Confined Space/Dive) ALS Medic Unit:           EMS Triage, Treat, Transport.       Responder Rehab DIVIDING THE INCIDENT For the purpose of coordinating operations, the following procedures shall be used when geographically dividing an emergency incident. Structures    Geographical areas of the incident may be designated as Divisions, when a division supervisor is assigned to that area with objectives and resources. Unless otherwise designated, the front, or street address of the building shall be Division A (Alpha). Other Divisions shall be identified in a clockwise manner as B (Bravo), C (Charlie), and D
(Delta). The IC has the discretion to identify any side of the building as Division A, and the other Divisions shall be identified accordingly.    Interior quadrants of each floor of a building shall be designated according to the closest Divisions (i.e., the left rear corner of a building is the B (Bravo)/C (Charlie) quadrant or corner).    Vertically, each floor level of a building may be designated as a Division according to the number of the floor. (i.e., the 10th floor of a building will be designated as Division 10).    The roof shall be designated as Roof Division, and the basement shall be Basement Division.    Unusual areas such as multiple sub-basements, mezzanines, etc. shall be designated as Divisions, but may be identified at the IC’s discretion.    Exposures shall be identified by the side of the involved structure to which it is exposed. (i.e., the exposure facing Division Charlie of an involved structure would be identified as Exposure Charlie).    Geographical areas (exterior sides or floors of a building) do not become designated as Divisions until the IC establishes the area as a Division and assigns a Division Supervisor to oversee operations there (i.e., The 14th floor becomes Division 14 when a Division 14 Supervisor is assigned to it with resources and objectives to complete in that area).    Single resources (Engines/Trucks, etc.) may be assigned to operate in a geographical area (side/floor) without creating a Division, if span of control rules allow, or other factors dictate.
ROOF DIVISION 5th Floor DIVISION 5 4th Floor DIVISION 4 3rd Floor DIVISION 3 2nd Floor DIVISION 2 1st Floor DIVISION 1 BASEMENT DIVISION Open Areas Incidents in areas that involve open areas shall also be divided using Divisions. Geographic areas necessary to maintain command and control should be established using natural dividing lines such as roads, creeks, railroad beds, city blocks, etc. whenever possible. Division A 3 C ompanies RR > Division B 3 C ompanies Division C 5 C ompanies Hwy > FIRE AREA COMMAN D                          10 AC RES BR USH
Exposures: Schools,                               Exposures: Homes, Hwy. Hospitals, Etc.                                   Apts. Di vision A                                      Di vision B Roadway Spill Wind Direction LEVELS OF COMMAND See ICS 2-0 Incident Command for more on the levels of command Strategic- Consists of the IC, Command and General Staff (Ops Sections, etc.)    Strategic level officers address the incident priorities, establish objectives, predict outcomes (looking ahead), and allocate resources.    Sphere of awareness is 50ft. +    Focused on the “big picture”, and may not be in a good physical position to directly supervise resources operating at the task level or monitor critical fireground factors (i.e., changing smoke conditions, fire/building conditions, entry points of task level crews). Tactical- Consists of company or chief officers assigned by the IC to assume the responsibilities of a Group or Division Supervisor.    The tactical level officer fills the gap between the strategic and task levels directing task level crews within a function or geographical area towards accomplishing objectives set by the IC.    Sphere of awareness is 6 – 50 ft.    The tactical level officer is closer to the task level operations than the IC, and more mobile, but back enough from the task level to supervise multiple crews and see a bigger incident picture. Task- Consists of company officers that are directly supervising hands-on operations of their crew in the hazard area.    Sphere of awareness is 0 – 6 ft.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                 ICS 3-0    These officers are typically task saturated, meaning they are in the IDLH, may be in zero or near zero visibility, with their crew, directing hands on tasks (i.e., advancing an attack line, searching rooms).    These officers are able to supervise their own crew, but are not in a good position to multi-task, supervise multiple other crews, or see the bigger incident picture. Initial Strategic and Task Level Operations The initial arriving IC at a working incident (or an IC at a smaller, less complex incident involving a small number of task level companies) can use single resources (engine/truck companies, etc.), designated by their unit number, such as Engine 53 or Truck 41, to INITIATE task level operations.    INITIATE: Indicates what the company will be doing at the task level.    ASSUME: Indicates that a position and its responsibilities have been assigned to a company or chief officer at the strategic or tactical level (i.e., An officer arrives and ASSUMES Command, or is assigned by the IC to ASSUME the tactical level position and responsibilities of the Fire Attack, Division Alpha, or Division 3 Supervisor). This individual officer is then called by that strategic or tactical level designator (Fire Attack, Division Alpha, Division 3, etc.). Example: The first arriving Engine 31 Captain ASSUMES Command (working command) at a working fire and assigns Engine 31 to INITIATE fire attack operations and Truck 31 to INITIATE search operations. Initiating the Tactical Level of Command As an incident expands, or is expected to quickly expand as more resources arrive, the IC may assign company and/or chief officers to assume tactical level positions as Group or Division Supervisors, in order to maintain proper span of control and better manage the incident. The initial arriving officers that enter and are operating in the hazard/IDLH area (possibly in zero or near zero visibility) initiating task level operations are usually task saturated and NOT in a good position to assume a tactical level position as a Group or Division Supervisor. It may be better to assign a second, third or later arriving company or chief officer to tactical level positions behind the initial arriving company officers. As with Command Mode, when a company officer is assigned to assume a tactical level position, a senior member of the company may “move up” within the company to assume the position of acting Captain or the company officer may assign the crew members to work under the task level supervision of another company officer. Tactical Level Groups and Divisions Groups and Divisions do the following:    Reduce the span of control to more manageable sized units
   Become the eyes/ears for the IC and supervises the task level operations and safety/accountability of the crews assigned to them.    The IC/Ops Chief communicates principally with these tactical organizational levels, rather than multiple, individual company officers and reduces radio communications. Communications/status reports are made from Group/Division Supervisors to the IC/Ops Chief or to Branch Directors if they are established.    Places responsibility for the details and execution of a particular function (i.e., Fire Attack) or the activities conducted in a particular geographical area (i.e., Division 2) on an identified Group/Division based on the objectives set by the IC.    Provides for an increased level of safety and personnel accountability. All task level single resources assigned to a Group/Division Supervisor work for, communicate with and report directly to their Group/Division Supervisor. This allows the Supervisor to direct those crew’s Task Level operations, coordinate all operations within their functional or geographical area, consolidate critical information received from crews and reduce radio traffic to the IC. While the Group/Division Supervisor takes on the identifying designator of their Tactical Level assignment (Fire Attack, Division 3, etc.) the Task Level crews/companies working under them retain their normal designator (Engine 52). Group/Division Supervisor’s roles and responsibilities include, but are not limited to:    Understanding objectives/risks in broad terms    Maintaining the “big picture” of their particular function or area and how it relates to the overall IAP.    Making tactical decisions based on objectives/situation.    Supervise/Account for resources assigned to their Group/Division.    Coordinate with other functional groups/geographical divisions or other assigned single resources.    Watch building/fire conditions, monitor interior and exterior conditions, etc.    Give status reports to, and request additional resources from IC    Act as an imbedded, forward deployed safety officer for their function or area.    Tactical level officers should be looking, listening, communicating and acting ahead. The ideal tactical supervisor maintains accountability of personnel, knowledge of assignments and status thereof, recognizes and addresses immediate hazards, and communicates needs to the IC. Groups Groups are a tactical organizational level responsible for a specific functional assignment at an incident (i.e., Fire Attack, Search, Haz Mat, Medical) All resources assigned to a particular group work to accomplish that function. For example, Fire Attack Group is responsible for ALL operations necessary to locate, confine and extinguish the fire throughout the entire structure/incident, including any back up lines and any additional lines to other areas of the structure with the objective of locating, confining and extinguishing any and all fire. In the below diagram, the Fire Attack Group is comprised of Engine 43, 42, and 41, all under the
command of the Engine 43 Captain as the Fire Attack Group Supervisor, or for the purpose of radio transmissions simply “Fire Attack”, who reports to the IC/Ops Chief. In the below example, seven resources, with twenty-eight individual personnel, are operating at the incident, but only three people (the Fire Attack, Ventilation, and Search Group Supervisors) need to actually communicate directly with the IC/Ops Chief, maintaining a span of control of three. IC or Ops Section FIRE ATTACK GROUP            VENTILATION GROUP                 SEARCH GROUP E-43 Capt.                    T-78 Capt.                    E-56 Capt. E-43                          T-78                           E-56 E-42                          T-61                           E-77 E-41 Divisions A division is a tactical organizational level responsible for all operations in a specific geographical area. Assigning a Division means that everything that happens in, and objectives assigned within that geographical area are the responsibility of the person assigned to be in charge of that Division. For example, Battalion 5 is assigned to assume Division 3 on the 3 rd floor of a three story apartment building fire. All resources assigned to Division 3 are supervised by Battalion 5, who becomes the Division 3 Supervisor. If three engines and two truck companies are assigned to Division 3, they all report to Battalion 5 as the Division 3 Supervisor, or for the purpose of radio transmissions, simply “Division 3” The Division 3 Supervisor can then utilize those resources to handle any needs on that Division, based on the objectives set by the IC for that area, including fire attack, search, overhaul, etc. In the below example, ten resources are operating, but only three people (the Division Supervisors) need to actually communicate directly with the IC/Ops Chief, maintaining span of control. Similarly, twenty individual personnel (four per company) are operating on Division 3, but only five (the engine and truck captains) report directly to the Division 3 Supervisor.
IC or Ops Section DIVISION 1                  DIVISION 2                   DIVISION 3 E-24 Capt.                   E-41 Capt.                  Battalion 5 E-24                         E-41                        E-53 E-5                         E-34                        E-60 T-41                        E-30 T-61 T-34 Tactical officers assigned to assume Division Alpha, Bravo, Charlie or Delta on the exterior of a structure are responsible for supervising resources/crews operating in that area on the exterior AND any resources/crews that enter the hazard area/building from that side. If resources that reported to a geographically-based Division exit from a different location than they entered, they must still make face-to-face contact with their supervisor for accountability purposes.
Use of an Interior Division Tactical Officer The IC may opt to assign a Tactical Officer to assume the position of Interior Division Supervisor at smaller (less than 3,000 sq. ft.) single family dwellings with no reports of known victims trapped. The Interior Division Supervisor is responsible for all crews and operations on the interior of the structure (i.e., attacking the fire, searching, overhaul). As with any other Division or Group Supervisor, the Interior Division Supervisor may operate in the “warm zone”, monitoring, communicating and accounting for interior crews, monitoring the exterior to maintain a “bigger picture” view of what’s going on (i.e., coordinating with tactical roof operations, watching fire/smoke/building conditions) as well as communicating with the IC. Positioning of Tactical Level Officers Positioning of the Division/Group Supervisor will vary depending on the assignment. Regardless of the location, the Division/Group Supervisor must wear full PPE and be prepared to don SCBA, as he/she may enter the IDLH periodically to check status of crews and task accomplishment. The tactical officer must remain mobile and flexible in his/her positioning so that crew status, as well as interior and exterior conditions can be monitored. He/she must also be in a visible position to allow incoming resources to “check-in” and receive an assignment.    A Roof Division Supervisor should capture a position that facilitates observation of the task level work but also allows sending and receiving radio messages.    An Interior Division Supervisor may position him/herself at the threshold of the hazard/IDLH area in a small structure (i.e., at or just inside the front door) to monitor conditions, observe task level work, and serve as a check-in for additional resources, while being periodically mobile to maintain a bigger picture of the exterior of the structure, including roof operations, fire/smoke conditions, etc.    Alpha, Bravo, Charlie or Delta Division Supervisors must be positioned on the respective side designated in a visible location to monitor activities.    In multi-story structures (i.e., apartment buildings, high-rise) where Division 1,2,3, etc. is utilized, the Supervisor maintains a position in the stairwell at the entry to that particular Division, but may have to enter the IDLH to check progress.    Groups do not have a specific geographical assignment on scene. A Group Supervisor must ensure that his/her location is known for incoming resources to report for task level functions. Options for When and Where to Utilize the Tactical Level of Command Ultimately, it is up to the IC to organize the command structure of the incident based on the situation, objectives and the resources available in order to make operations as efficient, effective and safe as possible. However, here are some templates for different types of
incidents that the IC may opt to utilize, as well as the recommended positioning of the tactical supervisor. DIVISION/GROUP                   WHEN USED                 POSITION OF SUPERVISOR Interior Division          Small single-family dwellings      Threshold of IDLH within voice, visual, or physical contact of interior crews, and periodically mobile around structure to maintain a bigger picture. Division Alpha, Bravo,     Structures with multiple entry     Often outside IDLH in visible Charlie, Delta             points, larger or multi (2-3)      location on the designated story single family dwellings,     side. May have to periodically commercial structures, etc.        enter IDLH to monitor conditions. Division 1, 2, 3,          Multi-story structures (i.e.       Stairwell to the designated Basement, etc.             apartment bldgs.), high-rises      division Roof Division              As designated by Command           Visible position on roof Attack Group, Rescue       As designated by Command,          Location where function is Group, Ventilation         imminent rescues (persons          needed—must be Group, Search Group,       reported trapped), firefighter     communicated to IC and Medical Group, etc.        MAYDAY’s                           incoming resources as it is discovered Alpha to Zebra Division    As designated by Command,          Visible position where or name the Division       large incidents such as            resources can report and be based on location.         wildland fires or disasters that   observed performing tasks span a large geographical area. . Combined Geographical Divisions, Functional Groups and Single Resources It is also possible to have both Divisions and Groups working under the IC/Ops Chief (or under Branches if they are established and utilized), in addition to single resources with an assignment. It is important to remember that any incident organizational structure should be developed based on the needs of the incident, while maintaining an appropriate span of
control Divisions (based on geographical locations) may work in conjunction with funct ional Groups assigned to specific tasks at the incident. Alternatively, Groups may be assigned throughout the entire incident and may work independently or in conjunction with Divisions. While resources assigned to a Division operate in that particular geo graphical area, Functional Groups may move and operate anywhere, as needed, throughout the entire incident. Organizationally, the Supervisors of Divisions and Groups have the same level of authority. Example: IC or Ops Section FIRE ATTACK       ROOF GROUP         DIVISION        SEARCH             RIC          MEDICAL E-43 Capt.      T-78 Capt. E-43            T-78           E-56            R-33            M-42 E-42            T-61 Branches Branches have either functional or geographical responsibility for major aspects of incident operations. Branches are only established when the number of Groups/Divisions begins to exceed the IC/Ops Chief’s span of control. A Branch is situated between the IC/Ops Chief and the Groups/Divisions. The person that supervises a Branch is called a Director. Branches are identified by the use of Roman numerals/geographical area or by functional area names. The IC/Ops Chief should consider the use of additional radio frequencies when Branches are established.    Geographical Branches: When the number of Groups/Divisions operating in different areas of the incident begins to exceed the span of control for the IC/Ops Chief, Branches may be set up, allocating the Groups/Divisions between them. Groups working within a Branch operate only within the geographical area of that Branch. In the below example, the Branch I Director supervises everything on Division 7 and 8,
as well as a Search Group operating within those two Division’s areas. The Branch II Director supervises everything on Division 9, 10, and the Roof. IC or Ops Section BRANCH I                                  BRANCH II SEARCH DIV. 7        DIV. 8         DIV. 9       DIV. 10     ROOF DIV. GROUP    Functional Branches: Some incidents may require the establishment of large functional groups. For example, during an aircraft crash, several functional Branches (Fire, Medical, and Law Enforcement) may need to be established. IC or Ops Section LAW MEDICAL FIRE BRANCH               BRANCH ENFORCEMENT BRANCH
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 3-2 INITIAL FIRE ATTACK WORKSHEET (IFAW) TACTICAL WORK SHEET (TWS) REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION    DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1               New Format           Nov 2015       Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 INTRODUCTION To assist initial and later arriving incident commanders, two dry erase tactical worksheets have been distributed to be utilized by resources in the field. These worksheets are: 1. Initial Fire Attack Worksheet (IFAW) 2. Tactical Work Sheet (TWS) PURPOSE The purpose of the IFAW and TWS is to provide company and incident commanders with tools that are intended to increase incident scene accountability and provide mental prompts for the allocation and assignment of resources at an incident involving multiple companies. The initiation of a strong command and control presence and adequate firefighter accountability are two contributing factors to providing a relatively safe emergency scene. The lack of strong command and firefighter accountability generally contribute to firefighter injury and fire ground firefighter fatalities throughout the nation. SCOPE The fireground is a dynamic and often chaotic workplace. Company officers and Battalion Chiefs acting as fireground incident commanders must be able to effectively assign, track, and account for resources throughout an incident, as well as ensure that all strategic and tactical assignments are addressed. These tactical worksheets allow the incident commander to write and record all important incident activities. Use of these tactical worksheets shall become a normal part of the Incident Commander’s routine, beginning upon their arrival at the incident. Recording the details of assignments, actions, and locations as they occur eliminates having to play catch up later. It is much easier to record events as they happen than to attempt to figure out who is doing what, and where they are doing it, especially during a hazardous event or firefighter emergency. These worksheets compliment the department’s accountability system. (See SWD 1-1 Accountability and 1-3 SEMS) For a functional accountability system to be effective it must be able to answer the three following questions:     Who (companies/crews/individuals) is operating at the incident?

--- ICS 3-2 ---
   What are the assignments of all resources?    Where are those resources operating on the fireground? Advantages of using tactical worksheets:    Matches and supports the Incident Command System.    Records information in a standard place.    Supplies reminders of key points (memory jogger)    Provides a standard for all personnel and incidents    Supports the command transfer process.    Furnishes an ongoing tactical accounting and inventory system. This information can be saved on the board, taken back to quarters, and used to document information into the RMS. Initial Fire Attack Worksheet (IFAW) The Initial Fire Attack Worksheet shall be placed into service by the first ar riving company officer that arrives on scene AND assumes Command of the incident in Command mode. (See SOP ICS 2-1 Command Procedures). While enroute to the scene R-33/R-60 Captain will monitor the radio and track assignments given by the IC and once on location will confirm assignments with the on scene tactical worksheet. Entries: (Fig. 1) 1. Resources- In the blank space provided adjacent to the resources type, write the resource unit ID. Example: E-24, TR-21, M-24, B-2 OR E-63, TR-61, M-65, B-6 2. On scene- a. When a company is on location, but not assigned, or in staging, (available) one slash (/) should be placed in the box. b. When the company is given an assignment, (assigned) an additional slash, forming an X should be placed in the box. 3. Assigned task- The IC is the only person who may split a crew. State the assignment given to a resource. Example: Fire Attack, Ventilation, Search. As tactical assignments are addressed, mark the box adjacent to the tactical priority when it is assigned.                         Figure 1 4. Location- Where is the resource operating on the fireground, in general? Example: Division 2, Roof Division, Division B exposure, Basement, etc. Areas on the worksheet are also provided for the following:    List the location of the staging area (See SOP ICS 3-0 Operations Section).    List the apparatus in staging
   Check off strategic/tactical priorities such as Rescue, Exposures, Ventilation, FI U, MUD, Salvation Army, etc. as they are addressed.    Blank area to allow for a diagram drawing to be made of the incident, to include a plot plan of the building as well as resource locations.    The back of the worksheet provides additional helpful information such as sample ICS organizational charts for standard responses. Information recorded on the Initial Fire Attack W orksheet should be used to transfer vital information to the later arriving chief officer during a face to face transfer of command (See SOP ICS 2-1 Command Procedures) TACTICAL WORKSHEET (TWS) It shall be the standard operating procedure for all battalion chiefs or acting battalion chiefs to utilize the Tactical Worksheet (TWS) at all multi- company responses, except for those responses that only involve one engine/truck and one medic unit. Nothing in this standard operating procedure is meant to prevent a BC or acting BC from using the TWS for incidents involving one engine/truck and one medic. This board is designed for use at the incident                          Figure 2 command post by chief officers who arrive and assume command of an incident. (Fig. 2) Areas on the work board include: 1. Alarm Data- Basic info such as date, alarm time, incident #, address, etc. In addition, an area is included to record Personnel Accountability Report (PAR) information. 2. Resources- Similar to the Initial Attack Worksheet, the unit ID of resources (Engine- E, Trucks- T, Medics-M, Battalion Chief- B, Rescue- R) can be recorded, as well as their assignment. (Fig. 3) 3. Command Assignments- Command staff and General Staff positions are recorded here, including the name of the person assigned to each, the time they were assigned, and their location. (See SOP ICS 2-0 Incident Command) 4. Updated/Time- An area is provided to record when the Incident Action Plan, Safety Plan, and Press Releases have been completed and updated. 5. Rehab- An area is provided to record when resources go into and come out of rehab. 6. Weather- An area is provided to record initial and updated weather conditions. Figure 3
7. Documentation of other information includes: a. Strategies- Checked off when assigned/completed b. Support- Assignments such as water supply, Staging, Rehab, etc. c. Special Units d. Services from outside agencies e. Notification of additional resources such as FIU, Safety officer, etc. f. Utility notifications. 8. As with the Initial Fire Attack Worksheet, a blank area in the center is provided to allow for a diagram of the ICS organizational chart, or drawing to be made of the incident, to include a plot plan of the building as well as resource locations. On the back of the Command Work board, are samples of ICS organizational charts for standard responses. The incident command system is designed to be flexible. These charts are examples of what is available to an IC at standard types of incidents. The IC is the person who is ultimately responsible for how resources are used at an emergency incident.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 4-0 PLANNING SECTION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1               New Format            Nov 2015       Langlois 888     Hunter 723        Hunter 723 PURPOSE Planning is responsible for the collection, evaluation, dissemination, and use of information about the development of the incident and the status of resources. This Section maintains information and intelligence on the current and forecasted situation, as well as the status of resources assigned to the incident. The Planning Section prepares and documents the Incident Action Plan (IAP ). A wide range of factors may affect incident operations. Planning must include an assessment of the present and projected situation. Proactive incident management is highly dependent on an accurate assessment of the incident's potential and prediction of likely outcomes. In addition to assessment of the situation status, there is a critical need to maintain information about resources committed to the incident and projected resource requirements. Development of an effective IAP, or modification of an existing plan, must be based on knowledge of what has happened and a prediction of probable future outcomes. Knowing what has happened creates a basis for understanding problem(s) leading to the current situation. Understanding the current situation creates a basis for accurate predictio n. Planning Section Chief When Planning is not specifically delegated to other personnel by the IC, the IC retains responsibility for all Planning functions. When faced with a complex or rapidly escalating incident, the IC may require assistance with the ICS planning function. The Planning Section Chief oversees all incident-related data gathering and analysis regarding incident operations and assigned resources, conducts Planning meetings, and prepares the IAP for each operational period. Some of the major responsibilities of the Planning Section Chief are to:     Collect and manage all incident-relevant operational data     Provide input to the IC and Operations Section Chief for use in preparing the IAP     Supervise preparation of the IAP     Conduct and facilitate planning meetings     Determine the need for specialized resources to support the incident     Establish specialized data collection systems as necessary (e.g., weather)

--- ICS 4-0 ---
   Assemble information on alternative strategies and contingency plans.    Provide periodic predictions on incident potential    Report any significant changes in incident status    Oversee preparation of the Demobilization Plan    Incorporate Traffic, Medical, and Communications plans, and other supporting material, into the IAP. One great value is that the Planning Section Chief assists the IC in being a proactive manager, rather than reacting to the demands of the incident. The Planning Section Chief is responsible for all planning functions needed for an incident. This individual should establish functional units when needed to maintain an acceptable workload and span of control. Subordinate planning functions may be combined when workload permits. The Planning Section Chief should be assigned before implementation of subordinate Units to prevent an excessive span of control or information overload for the IC. Incident Action Plan (IAP) The IAP is developed by the IC/Planning Chief. It is a plan for an organized course of events that addresses all phases of incident control within a specified time. An IAP is necessary to affect successful outcomes in any situation, especially emergency operations, in a timely manner. Furthermore, the IAP must be completed in a timeframe that allows the least amount of negative action to continue. All ICS planning is designed around identifying accomplishments expected over a set period of time called the operational period. Incident action planning starts with establishing incident objectives and identifying a strategy to achieve a solution to the confronted problems. The strategy should be broad in nature and define what has to be done. Once the strategy has been defined, the IC/Ops Section Chief needs to select the tactics. The IAP also includes whatever support actions may be necessary to make the plan operable, e.g., water supply, utility control, SCBA cylinder filling, etc. Once the IAP is developed, the IC may start issuing directives and committing resources. These directives define objectives that must be completed in order to achieve the IAP goals. IAPs are not necessarily fully complete before orders are given, but sufficient information must be in place for the resources to achieve positive results effectively. Once the plan is established and resources are committed, it is necessary to assess the effectiveness of the plan. Information must be gathered and analyzed so that necessary modification and updating may be done to improve the effectiveness of the plan, if necessary. This step is part of the continuing size up process. Ongoing progress reporting by operational or management units allows the IAP to be modified based on current conditions.
Planning should not be overlooked when dealing with more routine incidents. An IAP must be developed by the IC/Planning Chief at every incident regardless of size or complexity. Smaller incidents that are routine and less complex do not need the creation of a written IAP, however the absence of a written plan does not decrease the need for planning. Regardless of whether an IAP is written or verbal, it should address the following areas:  What do we want to do?  Who will be responsible for doing it?  How will it be done?  How will we talk to each other?  What happens if someone gets hurt? When only a few units are engaged actively in a simple incident, the IAP is developed in the mind of the IC. The IAP includes the strategy and tactics for the incident as well as the supporting operations that must occur. The IC must ensure that operating resources and managers know the overall strategy. This information normally is conveyed when orders are issued to arriving companies and other officers. Written Incident Action Plan On large, complex incidents of long duration, the IC should use a more formal process. The result of the more formal planning process is the written IAP. The decision to create this more formal written plan rests with the IC. The benefits of this written plan are undeniable when the size and complexity of the response requires the participation of many responders and multiple agencies. Naturally, the initial IAP is in the mind of the IC until sufficient staff arrives to create an overall plan and commit it to writing. It is highly advantageous on these types of incidents to have a Planning Meeting headed by the Planning Section Chief. All of the Command Staff and General Staff, as well as others designated by the IC, should attend the Planning Meeting. The plan is developed for the next operational period with input from the attendees, and is placed in writing. All the attendees leave the meeting with an understanding of the goals and objectives to be accomplished. Additional Planning Meetings are scheduled on a frequency dictated by the needs of the incident. Modifications to the plan then are made and distributed. IAP Forms The following are the basic ICS forms used to develop a written IAP. This section will include a brief description of each form as well as an example of each form filled out for a simulated incident. ICS-201 Incident Briefing Form This is a four page document that is designed for the initial Incident Commander to quickly record the incident situation, initial actions he or she has taken, the organization and resources that are on-scene and those that have been ordered. It forms the beginnings of a
written IAP. It is designed to initially standalone until a formal written IAP can be developed using ICS forms 202 through 206 (see below). The initial incident information that has been recorded on the OFD tactical worksheets (ICS 3-2 IFAW & TWS Worksheets) can easily be transferred to the ICS-201, or if the ICS-201 is not used, can be transferred to ICS forms 202 – 206. The ICS-201 is an excellent document to brief incoming personnel from and to use to conduct a transfer of command. Formal Written IAP Forms There are many ICS forms, but not all of them are used at every incident. The following five documents (ICS 202 – 206) are the basic forms used to develop a formal written IAP. In addition to these five forms, the IC determines which additional ICS forms and attachments are included in the IAP. ICS-202 Incident Objectives (What do we want to do?) This form includes incident information, a listing of the IC’s objectives for the operational period, pertinent weather information, a general safety message, and a table of contents page for the plan. ICS-203 Organizational Assignment List (Who will be responsible for doing it?) This form provides a full accounting of incident management and supervisory staff for that operational period. ICS-204 Assignment List (How will it be done?) This form includes specific assigned resources with leader name and number of personnel assigned to each resource. An ICS 204 will be created for each Division/Group/Branch. ICS-205 Incident Communications Plan (How will we talk to each other?) This form summarizes the communications plan for the entire incident including resource assignments and what radio frequencies they are to use. ICS-206 Medical Plan (What happens if someone gets hurt?) This form presents the plan for providing responder medical care and rehabilitation only. (It is important to remember that the ICS-206 does NOT provide a plan for non-responder emergencies, which should be addressed within the Operations Section under th ose EMS duties assigned within a Division/Group/Branch, and identified on an ICS-204) Supporting Documents Other documents that are not formal ICS forms may also be included in the IAP. Additional supporting documents may include:    Maps and other incident facility plot plans
   Safety messages    Detailed weather forecasts    Traffic plans    Org. charts (ICS Form 207) and other important info for operational supervisors Example ICS-201 Forms The following four pages show an example of the ICS-201 Incident Briefing Form that has been filled out for a 2-Alarm apartment building fire. Normally the ICS 201 would be handwritten in the field; however for clarity this example is typed.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                      ICS 4-0 1. Incident Name                      2. Date Prepared    3. Time Prepared INCIDENT BRIEFING                                               Ma y 3 1 , 2 01 0   2300 Hrs 40 t h S t re et C o mm a nd 4. Map Sketch North Center St. 1901 S. 40 th St. STAGING Parkin AREA                                                           g Lot Parking 40th St.                   1903 HYDRANT                                                 S. 40th ICP                                                    St. Fire ICS 201         5. Prepared by (Name and Position) Page 1 of 4      D. Williams, FC2, IC ICS FORM 201 PAGE 1
6. Summary of Current Actions Current Situation:  Working fire on the East side, on Division 2 of a 2-story apt. building. Fire extension into common attic area of building. 2 nd alarm units on location. Objectives:  Contain fire to east end of Division 2 and attic area by 2320 hrs.  Complete primary search on Div. 2 by 2310 hrs and Div. 1 by 2315 hrs.  Account for wellbeing of all occupants of fire building by 2320 hrs.  Be prepared for possible switch to defensive operation by 2335hrs. Current Actions:  Division 2: Attacking fire on Div. 2 and attic/Primary search of Div. 2.  Roof Div.: Vertical ventilation and trench cut.  Division1: Completing primary search on Div. 1/Checking for fire extension.  Medical Group: Pt. treatment and possible transport.  Rehab Group: Responder rehab and coor. with Salvation Army. Rescue 30 located here. ICS 201 Page 2 ICS FORM 201 PAGE 2
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                        ICS 4-0 7. Current Organization 1st Alarm: E-33, 34, 3,         T-34, 31, B-3, 1, M-34,              R-60, R-33, R-30. 2nd     Alarm:    E-5,     31          T-1       M-31                 B-5         Sup-1             FC-2 IC Safety FC-2 Staging                          B-1 RIC E-31                                    R-33 Div. 2              Div. 1                Roof Div.               Med.             Rehab Group            Grp. B-3                 B-5                   T-34 Capt.                   S-1        M-31 Capt. E-33                   E-3                    T-34               M-34             M-31 E-34                   E-5                    T-1                                 Sal. Army T31                                                                               R-30 R-60 ICS 201 Page 3 ICS FORM 201 PAGE 3
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                            ICS 4-0 8. Resources Summary Resources Ordered                   Resource Identification    ETA   On Scene       Location/Assignment X                         IC Asst. Chief                             FC-2 X        Incident Safety Officer (ISO) Batt. Chief                              B-1 X            Division 2 Supervisor Batt. Chief                              B-3 X                    Division 2 Engine                               E-33 X                    Division 2 Engine                               E-34 X                    Division 2 Tr u c k                           TR-31 X                    Division 2 Rescue                               R-60 X            Division 1 Supervisor Batt. Chief                              B-5 X                    Division 1 Engine                                E-3 X                    Division 1 Engine                                E-5 X       Roof Div. (TR-34 Capt is Sup) Tr u c k                           TR-34 Tr u c k                            TR-1                      X                R o o f D i vi s i o n P a r a m e d i c S u p e r vi s o r       S u p e r vi s o r 1            X        Me d . G r o u p S u p e r vi s o r Me d i c U n i t                        M-34                      X               Me d i c a l G r o u p Me d i c U n i t                        M-31                      X       Rehab Grp (M-31 Capt. is Me d . G r o u p S u p e r vi s o r ) Air Unit                              R-30                      X               Rehab Group S a l va t i o n A r m y                                              X                Rehab Group X                        RIC Rescue                               R-33 X                     Staging Engine                               E-31 ICS 201 Page 4 ICS FORM 201 PAGE 4
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                           ICS 4-0 Example of a Formal Written IAP The 2-Alarm apartment building fire incident expanded in size and complexity when a meth lab (including associated chemicals) was discovered in the apartment of origin (2B) and two civilian fatalities were found in apartment 2C. The following are ICS forms 202 through 206 and an example of a supplemental form (ICS form 207) for a written IAP. The incident will extend into multiple operational periods. INCIDENT OBJECTIVES                                1. INCIDENT NAME                          2. DATE           3. TIME 40th STREET COMMAND                    June 1, 2010      0030 HRS 4. OPERATIONAL PERIOD (DATE/TIME) 06-01-10 0100 hrs to 06-01-10 0700 hrs (6 hr. operational period) 5. GENERAL CONTROL OBJECTIVES FOR THE INCIDENT (INCLUDE ALTERNATIVES) Have hazardous materials (meth lab) contained and removed from building by 0430 hrs. Have all personnel deconned and building cleared to begin overhaul by 0530 hrs. Begin overhaul operations to ensure complete extinguishment by 0600 hrs. (Will carry over into next operational period). Begin arson/homicide criminal investigation (once area is deemed safe for investigators) by 0630 hrs. (Will carry over into next operational period.) Prepare for OFD shift change at end of operational period. 6. WEATHER FORECAST FOR OPERATIONAL PERIOD Temp. 76 deg. F. 20% humidity. Winds 5mph out of the south. Clear sky. 7. GENERAL SAFETY MESSAGE Entire building is hot zone until haz-mat operation completed. Entry by authorized personnel in proper PPE only. Beware of loss of building structural integrity in roof and weakened floors on east end of Divisi on 2. 8. Attachments (  if attached)  Organization List (ICS 203)           Medical Plan (ICS 206)                       Weather Forecast  Assignment List (ICS 204)              Incident Map                                Organizational Chart  Communications Plan (ICS 205)          Traffic Plan                            9. PREPARED BY (PLANNING SECTION CHIEF)                       10. APPROVED BY (INCIDENT COMMANDER) OFD B/C S. Williams                                            Unified Command (OFD FC-2 Smith/OPD Capt. Larsen) ICS FORM 202 INCIDENT OBJECTIVES
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                             ICS 4-0 2.              DATE 1. INCIDENT NAME                              3. TIME PREPARED PREPARED ORGANIZATION ASSIGMENT LIST 40th St. Command       06-01-10               0030 hrs. POSITION                    NAME                            4. OPERATIONAL PERIOD (DATE/TIME) 06-01-10 0100 hrs to 06-01-10 0700 hrs (6 hr. operational period) 5. INCIDENT COMMAND AND STAFF                               9. OPERATIONS SECTION FC-2   Smith/OPD         Cpt. INCIDENT COMMANDER (UC)                                     CHIEF                                   OFD B-3 P. Watson Larsen DEPUTY                                                      DEPUTY SAFETY OFFICER              OFD B-1 C. Bellson              a. BRANCH I- DIVISION/GROUPS FIRE BRANCH INFORMATION OFFICER         OPD Lt. D. Wayne                BRANCH DIRECTOR                         OFD B-1 C. Isener LIAISON OFFICER                                             DEPUTY DIVISION/GROUP         Division 1       E-3 Capt. R. Sampson 6. AGENCY REPRESENTATIVES                                   DIVISION/ GROUP        Division 2       E-33 Capt. J. Hurd AGENCY            NAME                                      DIVISION/ GROUP DIVISION/GROUP DIVISION /GROUP b. BRANCH II- DIVISIONS/GROUPS    LAW ENFORCEMENT BRANCH BRANCH DIRECTOR                OPD Lt. R. Ventnor DEPUTY DIVISION/GROUP         Cr. Inv. Grp.    OPD Sgt. M. Landry Meth      Lab 7. PLANNING SECTION                                         DIVISION/GROUP                          OPD Sgt. D. Grant Grp CHIEF                       OFD B/C S. Williams             DIVISION/GROUP DEPUTY                                                      DIVISION/GROUP RESOURCES UNIT              OFD Capt. S. Rodriguez SITUATION UNIT              OPD Sgt. L. Paulson             c. BRANCH III- DIVISIONS/GROUPS DOCUMENTATION UNIT                                          BRANCH DIRECTOR DEMOBILIZATION UNIT                                         DEPUTY TECHNICAL SPECIALISTS                                       DIVISION/GROUP DIVISION/GROUP DIVISION/GROUP 8. LOGISTICS SECTION                                        d. AIR OPERATIONS BRANCH CHIEF                       OFD Sup. 1 F. Harvey            AIR OPERATIONS BR. DIR. DEPUTY                                                      AIR TACTICAL GROUP SUP. AIR SUPPORT GROUP SUP. HELICOPTER COORDINATOR a. SUPPORT BRANCH                                           AIR TANKER/FIXED WING CRD. DIRECTOR SUPPLY UNIT FACILITIES UNIT GROUND SUPPORT UNIT                                         10. FINANCE/ADMINISTRATION SECTION CHIEF DEPUTY b. SERVICE BRANCH                                           TIME UNIT DIRECTOR                                                    PROCUREMENT UNIT COMMUNICATIONS UNIT                                         COMPENSATION/CLAIMS UNIT MEDICAL UNIT                M-31 Capt. T. Obermier          COST UNIT FOOD UNIT                   Salvation Army- Jane Easton PREPARED BY (RESOURCES UNIT) OFD Capt. S. Rodriguez ICS FORM 203 ORGANIZATION ASSIGNMENT LIST
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                           ICS 4-0 1. BRANCH FIRE BRANCH 2. DIVISION/GROUP DIV. 2                       ASSIGNMENT LIST 3. INCIDENT NAME                                                4. OPERATIONAL PERIOD 40 TH STREET COMMAND                                           DATE                        TIME 06-01-10                 0100 hrs 5. OPERATIONAL PERSONNEL OPERATIONS CHIEF       OFD B-3 P. Watson          DIVISION/GROUP SUPERVISOR                  E-33 Capt. J. Hurd BRANCH DIRECTOR        OFD B-1 C. Isener          AIR TACTICAL GROUP SUPERVISOR 6. RESOURCES ASSIGNED TO THIS PERIOD STRIKE TEAM/TASK                                                                                        DROP NUMBER        TRANS.        PICKUP FORCE/                                                                                             OFF PERSONS       NEEDED        PT./TIME RESOURCE DESIGNATOR            EMT          LEADER                                                        PT./TIME Engine 33                              Capt. J. Hurd            4             No Engine 34                              Capt. B. Darby           4             No Truck 31                               Capt. T. Sanders         4             No 7. CONTROL OPERATIONS Once haz-mat has cleared interior of building, begin salvage and overhaul operations on Division 2. 8. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS Apt. of origin is 2B. Civilian fatalities located in apt. 2C. Work with OPD and FIB investigators to preserve evidence during overhaul operations. 9. DIVISION/GROUP COMMUNICATIONS SUMMARY FREQ                                                      FREQ FUNCTION                       SYSTEM         CHAN.         FUNCTION                     SYSTEM              CHAN. .                                                         . LOCAL LOCAL COMMAND                                                    SUPPORT REPEA REPEAT T                  OFD           A-4 DIV./GROUP                                             GROUND TACTICAL                                               TO AIR PREPARED BY (RESOURCE UNIT LEADER)          APPROVED BY (PLANNING SECT. CH.)          DATE          TIME OFD Capt. S. Rodriguez                       OFD FIB B/C S. Williams                06-01-10       0030 hrs. ICS FORM 204 ASSIGNMENT LIST FOR DIVISION
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                   ICS 4-0 INCIDENT RADIO COMMUNICATIONS PLAN                     1. Incident Name    2. Date/Time Prepared 3. Operational Period Date/Time 40 th St. Command   06-01-10              06-01-10 0100hrs. 4. Basic Radio Channel Utilization System/Cache           Channel       Function        Frequency/Tone           Assignment             Remarks OFD                  A-4       Fire Tactical                              Fire Branch OPD                  G-5      OPD Joint Comm                              Law Branch OFD                  A-5       Fire Tactical                       Planning & Logs Sections OPD                  G-6      OPD Joint Comm                            Meth Lab Group 5. Prepared by (Communications Unit) OFD B/C S. Williams (Planning Section Chief) ICS FORM 205 INCIDENT COMMUNICATIONS PLAN
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                                                       ICS 4-0 1.       Incident Name         2.   Date Prepared           3.    Time Prepared     4.     Operational Period MEDICAL PLAN                 40th St. Command                   06-01-10                      0300 hrs.             0100 – 0700 hrs 5. Incident Medical Aid Station Paramedics Medical Aid Stations                                      Location Yes     No Rehab- OFD Medic 31                                       Front of 1903 S. 40 th St. (West side)                            X 6. Transportation A. Ambulance Services Paramedics Name                                      Address                                               Phone Yes     No Omaha Fire                                                                                                                  X B. Incident Ambulances Paramedics Name                                      Location Yes     No OFD Medic 31                              At Rehab area                                                                     X OFD Medic 34                              At Rehab area                                                                     X 7. Hospitals Travel   Time                         Helipad         Burn Center Name                     Address                                                            Phone Air    Ground                         Yes     No      Yes    No S. 42 nd Street                                       5min         ER 475-8236       X UNMC 8. Medical Emergency Procedures If haz-mat personnel involved, ensure decon before transport. Any personnel needing medical attention should notify their supervisor and go to Rehab area for treatment and possible transport. Prepared by (Medical Unit Leader)                                      10. Reviewed by (Safety Officer) M-31 Capt. T. Obermier                                                 OFD B-1 C. Bellson ICS FORM 206 MEDICAL PLAN
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                               ICS 4-0 UC OFD/OPD Safety PIO OFD B-1 OPD Lt. OPS                         PLNG                 LOGS OFD B-3                      OFD B/C             OFD Sup-1 Staging Resource         Medical Unit E-31                                                            Unit Situation            M-31 FIRE                            LAW Unit M-34 BRANC                            BRANC H                                H Food Unit Salvation DIV. 1         DIV. 2 Crim.             Meth. Invest.           Lab Grp                               Army E-3 Capt         E-33 Capt.              Grp. OPD Clan E-3              E-33            OFD FIU               Lab Unit OPD                      OFD E-2              E-34 Homicide                  Rescue T-31            OPD Uni.                   OFD Patrol                   Rescue Example of ICS FORM 207, (Supplemental Form) ICS Organizational Chart
Planning Section Units The Planning Section has four primary Units (Resources, Situation, Documentation, and Demobilization) and may also include technical specialists to assist in evaluating the situation and forecasting requirements for additional personnel and equipment. Some, all, or none of these Units may be established by the IC/Planning Chief, depending on the needs of the incident. Resources Unit The Resources Unit makes certain that all assigned personnel and resources have checked in at the incident. Resources consist of personnel, teams, crews, aircraft, and equipment available for assignment to or employment during an incident. The Resources Unit maintains a system for keeping track of the current location and status of all assigned resources and maintains a master list of all resources committed to incident operations. Resource tracking responsibilities are shared as follows:    Planning Section is responsible for tracking all resources assigned to the incident and their status, and there are only three types of status: Assigned, Available, and Out of Service. These three are defined in detail below.    Operations Section is responsible for tracking the assignment, location, and movement of resources within the Operations Section itself, by utilizing the structured ICS 204 within the IAP, as well as other systems that may be available. (i.e., OFD Accountability System, SWD 1-1 Accountability SOP).
Resources must be categorized by kind and type (capability and capacity), and resource status must be tracked continuously to manage them effectively during an incident. Tactical resources at an incident can have one of three status conditions:    Available resource: A resource that has arrived at the incident, checked in, and is available for an assignment, normally located in a staging area.    Assigned resource: A resource that has arrived, checked in, been given an assignment, and is performing an active function.    Out of service resource: An assigned resource is unable to function due to mechanical, personnel, or health reasons (i.e., Resource is in Rehab). Typically, when the status of a resource has changed (e.g., a unit that was previously listed as “out of service” is reclassified as “available”, the Unit Leader or the supervisor who approved the status change should immediately notify the Resources Unit Leader, who, in turn, will make the appropriate status reclassification. ***NOTE***: The resource status monitoring done by the Resource Unit tracks ALL incident resources as to whether they are available, assigned or out of service. It should NOT be confused with fireground/incident accountability procedures used by the IC/Ops Section Chief to track tactical resources working in the Operations Section, their assignment and location as outlined in the SWD 1-1 Accountability SOP. The Resource Unit is also responsible for the evaluation of:    Resources currently committed to incident;    Impact that additional responding resources will have on incident; and    Anticipated resource needs. Resource Units focus around the following concerns:    What effect are current resources having on controlling the incident?    Are there enough resources?    Are there too many resources?    Are they the right resources to solve the problem? This information provides the Planning Section with the information required to predict answers to these concerns:    What additional resources may be needed?    From where?    When will they arrive?    Will relief personnel be needed? Effective prediction of probable incident outcomes will allow timely and effective modification of the IAP.
Situation Unit The Situation Unit collects, processes, and organizes ongoing situation information; prepares situation summaries; and develops projections and forecasts of future events related to the incident. The Situation Unit prepares maps and also gathers and disseminates information and intelligence for use in the IAP. This Unit should be prepared to provide timely situation reports as scheduled or at the request of the Planning Section Chief or IC. This Unit may also require the expertise of technical specialists. Major concerns of this unit include:    What has happened?    What is happening currently?    What may happen?    How will it affect the incident? The Situation Unit may be staffed in large or complex incidents. In smaller or less complex incidents, this responsibility may be combined with responsibility for tracking resources. Documentation Unit The Documentation Unit maintains accurate and complete incident files, including a complete record of the major steps taken to resolve the incident; provides duplication services to incident personnel; and files, maintains, and stores incident files for legal, analytical, and historical purposes. Examples of incident documentation include incident reports, communication logs, injury claims, and situation status reports. In major incidents, thorough documentation is critical to post incident analysis. This Unit also compiles and publishes the IAP and maintains the files and records that are developed as part of the overall IAP and planning function. Demobilization Unit The Demobilization Unit is responsible for the development of a plan for the demobilization of the resources committed to an incident and assisting in the implementation of that plan. In incidents requiring a major resource commitment, an effective, safe, and cost-effective demobilization, and return of resources to service is dependent on adequate planning. Once the Incident Demobilization Plan is approved, the Demobilization Unit ensures that it is distributed both at the incident and elsewhere as necessary. Technical Specialists Technical specialists are people with relevant special skills or knowledge that may be applied to support incident operations. They are activated only when needed. Examples include building maintenance engineers, industry representatives, or private-sector chemists. Specialists may serve anywhere within the organization, including the Command Staff. No specific incident qualifications are prescribed or required, as technical speciali sts normally
perform the same duties during an incident that they perform in their everyday jobs, and they are typically certified in their fields or professions. Technical specialists are most often assigned to the specific area (Section, Branch, Unit, Division, etc.) where their services are needed and performed. In some situations they may be assigned to a separate Unit within the Planning Section, much like a talent pool, and assigned out to various jobs on a temporary basis. For example, a tactical specialist may be sent to the Operations Section to assist with tactical matters, a financial specialist may be sent to the Finance/Administration Section to assist with fiscal matters, or a legal specialist or legal counsel may be assigned directly to the Command Staff to advise the IC/UC on legal matters, such as emergency proclamations, legality of evacuation orders, isolation and quarantine, and legal rights and restrictions pertaining to media access. Generally, if the expertise is needed for only a short period and involves only one individual, that individual should be assigned to the Situation Unit. If the expertise will be required on a long-term basis and requires several persons, it is advisable to establish a separate Technical Unit in the Planning Section.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 5-0 LOGISTICS SECTION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION      DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY         APPROVED BY 1               New Format             Nov 2015       Langlois 888      Hunter 723         Hunter 723 The Logistics Section provides for all the support needs for the incident, such as ordering resources and providing facilities, transportation, supplies, equipment maintenance and fuel, food service, communications, and medical services for incident personnel. Even in a relatively simple structure fire, there are requirements for breathing air supply, drinking water for fluid replacement, and provision of emergency medical care for firefighting personnel. As an incident grows in size, complexity, and duration, the logistical needs of the operating forces also increase. When faced with a major incident, such as a haz-mat spill, a large wildland fire, or a structure fire involving a large building or multiple buildings, the logistical requirements are significant. Long-duration incidents of any type require provisions for feeding personnel, toilet facilities, refueling apparatus, and a myriad other service and support resources. When Logistics is not specifically delegated to other personnel by the Incident Commander (IC), the IC retains responsibility for all Logistics functions. The potential magnitude of the service and support requirements of a large or complex incident may in dicate that the IC should create a Logistics Section Chief position and delegate the functional authority for Logistics to maintain an effective span of control and an acceptable workload. Logistics Section Chief Responsibilities The Logistics Section Chief manages service and support resources required for the incident. The Logistics Section Chief is responsible for all Logistics functions needed for an incident. The major responsibilities of the Logistics Section Chief are to:     Manage all incident logistics     Provide logistical input to the IC in preparing the Incident Action Plan (IAP)     Brief Logistics Branch Directors and Unit Leaders as needed     Identify anticipated and known incident service and support requirements     Request/order additional resources, as needed.     Develop as required, the Communications, Medical, and Traffic Plans.     Oversee demobilization of the Logistics Section

--- ICS 5-0 ---
This individual should establish functional Units when needed to maintain an acceptable workload and span of control. These units include:    Communications Unit    Medical Unit    Food Unit    Supply Unit    Facilities Unit    Ground Support Unit Subordinate Logistics functions may be combined, when workload permits. The Logistics Section Chief should be assigned before implementation of subordinate Units to prevent an excessive span of control or information overload for the IC. Branches (Service Branch and/or Support Branch) may be required within Logistics to maintain span of control when all six functional Units are established. However, like all Branches, the Service/Support Branches are only established by the Logistics Section Chief when they are needed for span of control purposes. Logistics Section with Branch Organizational Structure Ordering Resources One of the major responsibilities of the Logistics Section is ordering resources. Usually, all incidents will have an initial commitment of resources automatically assigned (i.e., 1 st Alarm assignment dispatched to a building fire). At smaller incidents, as well as the initial stages of larger or more complex incidents the IC will typically make all additional resource requests
directly to the 911 Dispatch Center. At incidents where Level II staging has been established, the IC has the discretion to delegate authorization to the Staging Area Manager to request certain additional resources (2 nd Alarm, 3rd Alarm, etc.) in order to maintain a ready reserve in Staging. (See ICS 3-0 Operations Section, Level II Staging, page 3). As incidents grow in size or complexity, more resources may be required and the IC may augment existing resources with additional personnel and equipment. This usually results in a need for more supervisory and support personnel to maintain adequate span of control. In addition, the planning for additional resources becomes more complex. As a consequence, a more formalized resource ordering process may be needed. In all cases, final approval for ordering additional resources, as well as releasing resources from an incident, is the responsibility of the IC. However, at a major incident, it is not efficient use of the IC’s time to review and approve all resource orders for routine supplies (e.g., food). The IC may delegate approval of certain orders while reviewing and approving any non - routine requests, especially if they are expensive, require outside agency participation, or have potential political ramifications. If the Logistics Section Chief position has been filled, then the Logistics Section Chief has the delegated authority to place the resource order after the order has been approved by the IC or his/her designee. On even larger incidents, where the Logistics Section contains a Supply Unit, the Supply Unit has the authority to place the approved resource order.    APPROVING ORDERS: The IC approves resource orders    PLACING ORDERS: The IC, Logistics Section Chief, and Supply Unit Leader are authorized to place orders. At a large/complex incident, the Supply Unit may order a needed resource that has been approved by the IC. Once that resource has arrived it will check in with the Resource Unit in the Planning Section. If the Planning Section has not been established or if the resource is immediately needed to participate in tactical operations, then the resource may go directly to Staging and check in with the Staging Area Manager. If the resource bypasses the Resource unit and goes immediately into operation through the Staging Area, the Staging Area Manager will be responsible for notifying the Resource Unit that the resource has arrived and has been assigned. Douglas County Emergency Operations Center (EOC) Some incidents, especially the larger or more complex ones, may require resources not locally available to the IC/UC. If the circumstances of the incident require assistance in the coordination of available resources or augmentation with outside resources (i.e., regional, state, surrounding states, federal resources, etc.) the IC may request activation of the Douglas County Emergency Operations Center from the Emergency Management Director. The fire department will provide a representative to the Emergency Operations Center to
convey resource needs on behalf of the IC and participate in the exchange of information between IC and EOC necessary to maintain situational awareness. Logistics Section Components Service Branch When established, the Service Branch is responsible for service activities at incidents. It is managed by a Branch Director and contains three functional Units; Communications, Medical and Food Units. Communications Unit The Communications Unit develops the incident Communications Plan, distributes communications equipment, supervises the communications network, and maintains/repairs communications equipment. Communications planning is critical, especially in the context of a multiagency incident, for determining required radio nets, establishing interagency frequency assignments, and ensuring the interoperability and the optimal use of all assigned communications capabilities. Incident communications are managed through the use of an Incident Communications Plan. The Communications Unit is responsible for planning the use of radio frequencies; establishing networks for command, tactical, support, and air units; setting up on -scene telephone and public address equipment; and providing any required off-incident communications links. Medical Unit The Medical Unit is responsible for the effective and efficient provision of medical services to incident personnel. This unit does not provide treatment for civilians. If there is a requirement for provision of EMS for injured civilians, this would be an Operations function. The primary responsibilities of the Medical Unit include the following:    Develop procedures for handling any major medical emergency involving incident personnel    Develop the Incident Medical Plan (for incident personnel)    Provide transportation for injured incident personnel    Coordinate and establish the routine rest and rehabilitation of incident responders. (Rehab)    Ensure that injured incident personnel are tracked as they move from their origin to a care facility and from there to final disposition    Assist in processing all paperwork related to injuries or deaths of incident-assigned personnel.
Responder rehabilitation (rehab) includes medical evaluation and treatment, food and fluid replenishment, and relief from extreme climatic conditions for emergency responders, according to the circumstances of the incident. The Medical Unit Leader will develop a Medical Plan, which will, in turn, form a part of the IAP. Food Unit Providing meals for incident response personnel is the responsibility of the Food Unit. This may be a significant logistical task at major incidents, and often is required even at relatively minor incidents during severe environmental conditions or extended operations. The Food Unit determines food and hydration requirements of the responders, and has the responsibility for planning menus, ordering food, providing cooking facilities, cooking and serving food, maintaining food service areas, and managing food security and safety. The Food Unit must be able to anticipate incident needs, such as the number of people who will need to be fed and whether the type, location, or complexity of the incident predicates special food requirements. The Unit must supply food needs for the entire incident, including remote locations, as well as to operations personnel who are unable to leave their assignments. The Food Unit must interact closely with the following elements:    Planning Section, to determine the number of persons who must be fed    Facilities Unit, to arrange food service areas    Supply Unit, to order food, unless provided under contract or agreement    Ground Support Unit, to obtain ground transportation Support Branch When established, the Support Branch is responsible for providing the personnel, equipment, and supplies to support incident operations. The Support Branch is managed by a Branch Director and contains three functional Units, Supply, Facilities, and Ground Support Units. Supply Unit The Supply Unit orders, receives, processes, stores, inventories, and distributes all incident related resources and supplies, including personnel. Equipment and supplies may include non-expendable resources such as additional self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) cylinders and specialized equipment required for a haz mat spill, or may be expendable supplies, such as breathing air or foam concentrate. The Supply Unit also handles tool operations, which includes storing, disbursing and servicing tools and portable, non-expendable equipment. Additionally, the Supply Unit assists in projecting resource needs based on information provided in the IAP.
Facilities Unit The Facilities Unit sets up, maintains, and demobilizes all facilities used in support of incident operations. This unit sets up the formal Incident Command Post (ICP), Incident Base, and Camps; it also provides the services associated with maintaining those functions. The Incident Base and Camps may be established in areas having existing structures, which are used in whole or in part. The Facilities Unit also provides and sets up necessary incident response personnel support facilities, including areas for the following:    Food and hydration service    Sleeping    Sanitation and showers    Staging The Unit also orders, through the Supply Unit, such additional support items as portable toilets and lighting units. Ground Support Unit The Ground Support Unit is responsible for:    Maintaining and repairing primary tactical vehicles and mobile ground support equipment  Recording usage time for all ground equipment (including contract equipment) assigned to the incident  Supplying fuel for all mobile equipment  Providing transportation in support of incident operations  Developing and implementing an incident Traffic Plan. The Ground Support Unit also provides to the Resources Unit up-to-date information on the location and status of transportation vehicles assigned to the Ground Support Unit.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 5-1 ROOF DIVISION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1             New Format             Nov 2015       Langlois 888        Hunter 723      Hunter 723 PURPOSE To identify the responsibilities and objectives of the Roof Division. NOTE: The individual assigned to the roof and in charge of conducting roof assessment and either offensive or defensive vertical ventilation operations shall assume the tactical designation of “Roof Division”, and not “Ventilation Group”; this will eliminate any confusion when both roof operations and other ventilation operations are being conducted simultaneously at an incident. Ventilation of a building closely coordinated with application of water on the fire, especially in ventilation-limited (oxygen deprived) situations, is critical to the success of fire control operations and the safety of firefighters and victims. Command should establish a Roof Division during offensive OR defensive fire operations to evaluate roof conditions and to complete roof ventilation. Truck companies should be strategically placed to allow safe access to the roof, emergency exit from the roof, and in tactical positions that would permit effective defensive operations if needed. Roof Division responsibilities will be assigned to company or chief officers who must be on the roof in a position that facilitates observation of the task level work but allows sending and receiving radio messages. Safe roof operations are paramount. Roof Division crews must enter the roof from an established safe area and must have a secondary means to escape the roof, or to a safe refuge on an unexposed and structurally sound roof surface. The Roof Division will be responsible for obtaining its own protective hose line as needed. The first personnel reaching the roof must quickly evaluate conditions to assure the roof is structurally sound before attempting to work it. The degree and extent of any signs of weakness must be considered before committing personnel above the fire. Once on the roof, the Division Supervisor and personnel working within that Division must evaluate their route and progress as they proceed out onto the roof. A constant re-evaluation of roof safety must be maintained throughout roof operations; consider using “smoke indicator holes” to assis t with roof diagnostics. Time and fire conditions will be constantly working to weaken the roof.

--- ICS 5-1 ---
The initial Roof Division Supervisor shall remain in an “eyes up” posture to maintain situational awareness, and must report to command the following conditio ns: 1. As determined by the Inspection Cut:  Roof design and construction (flat/peaked, conventional/truss/steel/wood)  Structural conditions  Fire conditions or effects of fire on the roof and under the roof access point. 2. Locations of any fire walls 3. Locations of heavy objects that are affected by fire conditions 4. Ventilation plan 5. The need for additional egress ladders near the working location (“Working Set”); this will eliminate the need to traverse long areas of roof to access the egress point if an emergency egress situation arises. 6. Constantly monitor and communicate to Command; Roof Division can give an enormous amount of information regarding the structure to the IC for tactical decision making. The objectives for Roof Division include:    Determining a safe working surface.    Work towards a pre-designated egress route.    Complete adequate size ventilation hole(s) and achieve effective ventilation.    Coordinate roof ventilation with the ability and timing of fire attack crews to get water on the fire.    Coordinate roof accessed fire control operations ONLY as directed by Command.    Maintain roof-top monitoring of roof structure and fire conditions.    Identify safety zones for personnel operating within “Roof Division” and make sure they are known to everyone.    Coordinate and communicate with other single resource or tactical level officers. Adequate size ventilation holes must be cut and opened if ventilation is to be successful. Ventilation hole(s) of at least 10% of roof surface of the involved area is a rule of thumb to consider and then continue to assess the fire and smoke conditions for additional ventilation needs. In some cases, more than one hole will be required to meet the 10% objective. As one hole is opened, the Roof Division Supervisor should direct personnel to cut additional holes in the next adjacent areas. Crews must move from the first hole towards safer areas with each consecutive ventilation hole. Caution, additional holes consume time. The Roof Division Supervisor must constantly evaluate the structural stability of the roof as it relates to changing fire conditions and time.
The Roof Division Supervisor must advise command when ventilation holes are completed and the effect the ventilation has on the fire. Roof ladders shall be used for operations on any roof where slopes present a problem or crews cannot effectively operate aerial ladders or aerial platform appliances. All Roof Division personnel shall wear full protective clothing and equipment when operating above a fire. SCBA with face pieces connected will be worn at all times while operating above the fire. Command must closely coordinate any positive pressure ventilation, if that tactic is selected to support ventilation operations (This shall be compliant with the contraindications fo und in SOP OPS 8-0 Positive Pressure Ventilation & Attack) when it is being used in conjunction with roof ventilation. Positive pressure should not be utilized until an exhaust exit can be established on the fire floor (horizontal) or roof ventilation is completed.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 6-0 FINANCE/ADMINISTRATION SECTION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION    DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1              New Format            Nov 2015       Langlois 888      Hunter 723        Hunter 723 Finance/Administration is responsible for tracking all incident costs and evaluating the financial considerations of the incident. Financial considerations are not a major factor during most incident operations. However, when a department is involved in any incident that requires the use of private -sector resources or incidents where agencies involved in response will be seeking reimbursement, the financial considerations can be extensive. In addition, legal issues, responsibilities and questions related to the incident are usually handled under the Finance/Administration Section. A Finance/Administration Section may be established when there is a specific need for financial and/or administrative services to support incident management activities. When Finance/Administration functions are not specifically delegated to other personnel by the Incident Commander (IC), the IC retains responsibility for all Fin/Admin functions. FINANCE/ADMINISTRATIVE SECTION CHIEF RESPONSIBILITIES The Finance/Administration Section Chief must provide for the documentation of all incident costs, and provide guidance to the IC on financial issues that may have an impact on incident operations. The Fin/Admin. Section Chief must track and report to the IC the accrued cost as the incident progresses. This allows the IC to forecast the need for additional funds before operations are affected negatively, and it is particularly important if signific ant operational resources are under contract from the private sector. The Fin/Admin. Section Chief may also need to monitor expenditures to ensure that applicable statutory rules are met. Close coordination with the Planning and Logistics Sections is essential so that operational records can be reconciled with financial documents. The Fin/Admin. Section Chief’s responsibilities include:     Manage all financial aspects of the incident     Provide financial and cost analysis information as requested     Ensure compensation and claims functions are being addressed relative to the incident     Gather pertinent information from briefings with responsible agencies

--- ICS 6-0 ---
   Maintain daily contact with agency(ies) administrative headquarters on finance matters    Ensure that all personnel and equipment time records are accurately completed and transmitted to home agencies, according to policy.    Provide financial input for demobilization planning    Ensure that all obligation documents initiated at the incident are properly prepared and completed    Management of legal risk of incident (may also be under Planning). STAFFING OF FINANCE/ADMINISTRATION SECTION Finance/Administration usually is staffed in large-scale or complex incidents. Most fire departments lack the organizational structure to manage the financial demands of large-scale or complex incidents. Likely candidates for Finance/Administration Section Chief might be the city finance director or county budget director. Since most of the activities of Finance/Administration do not require face -to-face communication, these operations may be located away from the incident site. The Finance/Administration Section Chief is responsible for all finance functions needed for an incident. Four functional Units (Time, Procurement, Compensation/Claims, an d Cost Units) are available to this individual when needed to maintain an acceptable workload and span of control. These subordinate Finance/Administration functions may be combined when workload permits. The Finance/Administration Section Chief should be assigned before implementation of subordinate Units to prevent an excessive span of control or information overload for the IC. FINANCE/ADMINISTRATION COMPONENTS Time Unit The primary function of the Time Unit is the timekeeping required for personnel wor king at incident. It also ensures that the Logistics Section records or captures equipment -use time. Procurement Unit This unit administers all financial matters pertaining to vendor contracts. It coordinates with local jurisdictions to identify sources for equipment, prepares and signs equipment rental agreements, and processes all administrative requirements associated with equipment rental and supply contracts. In some cases, the Supply Unit in the Logistics Section will be responsible for certain procurement activities.
Compensation/Claims Unit The function of the Compensation/Claims Unit involves recordkeeping and financial concerns resulting from emergency responder injuries or fatalities at incidents. The individual handling injury compensation ensures that all forms required by workers’ compensation and local agencies are completed. This unit also maintains files on injuries and illnesses associated with the incident, and ensures that all witness statements are obtained in writing. Since the Medical Unit (Logistics Section) may also perform some of these tasks, close coordination between the Medical and Compensation/Claims Unit is essential. Cost Unit The principal functions of the Cost Unit are tracking costs, analyzing cost data, making cost estimates, and recommending cost-saving measures.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 7-0 INTELLIGENCE/INVESTIGATIONS FUNCTION REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR       REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1               New Format            Nov 2015      Langlois 888     Hunter 723        Hunter 723 The collection, analysis, and sharing of incident-related intelligence are important elements of ICS. Normally, operational information and situational intelligence are management functions located in the Planning Section, with a focus on three incident intelligence areas: situation status, resource status, and anticipated incident status or escalation (e.g., weather forecasts and location of supplies). This information and intelligence is utilized for incident management decision-making. In addition, technical specialists in the Planning Section may be utilized to provide specific information that supports tactical decisions. Incident management organizations must also establish a system for the collection, analysis, and sharing of information developed during intelligence/investigation efforts. Some incidents require intelligence and investigative information, which is defined in either of two ways. 1. Information that leads to the detection, prevention, apprehension, and prosecution of criminal activities or the individuals involved, including terrorist incidents. 2. Information that leads to determination of the cause, projection of spread, assessment of impact, or selection of countermeasures for a given incident (regardless of the source) such as public health events, disease outbreaks, or fires with unknown origins. The mission of the Intelligence/Investigations Function is to ensure that all investigative and intelligence operations, functions, and activities within the incident response are properly managed, coordinated, and directed in order to:     Prevent/deter additional activity, incidents, or attacks.     Collect, process, analyze, and appropriately disseminate intelligence information.     Conduct a thorough and comprehensive investigation.     Identify, process, collect, create a chain of custody for, safeguard, examine/analyze, and store all probative evidence.     Determine source or cause and control spread and impact, in the investigation of emerging incidents (fire, disease outbreak, etc.). The Intelligence/Investigations Function has responsibilities that cross all interests of departments involved during an incident; however, certain functions remain specif ic to law enforcement response and mission areas. Two examples of these are to expeditiously identify and apprehend all perpetrators, and to successfully prosecute all defendants.

--- ICS 7-0 ---
Intelligence/Investigation Location in the Command Structure ICS allows for organizational flexibility, so the Intelligence/Investigations Function can be embedded in several different places within the organizational structure.    As an Officer in the Command Staff: This option may be most appropriate in incidents with little need for tactical or classified intelligence and in which incident- related intelligence is provided by supporting Agency Representatives, through real time reach back capabilities.    As a Unit within the Planning Section: This is the traditional placement for this function and is appropriate for incidents with little or no investigative information requirements nor a significant amount of specialized information.    As a Branch within the Operations Section: This option may be most appropriate in incidents with a high need for tactical intelligence (particularly classified intelligence), and when law enforcement is a member of the Unified Command.    As a Separate General Staff Section: This option may be most appropriate when an incident is heavily influenced by intelligence factors, or when there is a need to manage and/or analyze a large volume of classified or highly sensitive intelligence or information. This option is      particularly relevant to a terrorism incident, for which intelligence plays a crucial role throughout the incident life cycle. (For this option, DHS/FEMA has developed the following document under the National Incident Management System: “Intelligence/Investigations Function Guidance and Field Operations Guide, October 2013”) The Information and Intelligence function also is responsible for developing, conducting, and managing information-related security plans and operations as directed by the IC. These can include information security and operational security activities, as well as the complex task of ensuring that sensitive information of all types (e.g., classified information, sensitive law enforcement information, proprietary and personal information, or export -controlled information) is handled in a way that not only safeguards the information but also ensures that it gets to those who need access to it so that they can conduct their missions effectively and safely. The Information and Intelligence function also has the responsibility for coordinating information- and operational-security matters with public awareness activities that fall under the responsibility of the Public Information Officer (PIO), particularly where such public awareness activities may affect information or operations security. Regardless of how the Intelligence/Investigations function is organized, a close liaison will be maintained, and information will be transmitted to Incident Command, the Operations Section, and the Planning Section. However, classified information requiring a security clearance, sensitive inform ation, or specific investigative tactics that would compromise the investigation will be shared only with those who have the appropriate security clearance or a need to know.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM 8-0 INCIDENT COMMAND FOR HIGH RISE OPERATIONS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1              New Format            Nov 2015        Langlois 888     McEvoy 680        Hunter 723 2          Terminology updates        Jul 2017       Langlois 888     Bernard 892       McCaw 897 “Overwhelm the enemy with disproportionate force” DEFINITION Any building having floors designed for human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department access. These buildings include those that lack viable access to the upper floors for firefighting, and in which firefighters must place almost complete reliance on the building’s systems and components for fire suppression. These buildings may present problems such as difficult access, complex construction or a number of occupants within the structure. A high-rise building will normally be 75 ft. high, but any building that could over power normal firefighting procedures shou ld be considered a high-rise. When faced with this type of situation, pro-active ICS high-rise firefighting operations should be instituted. HIGH-RISE ICS The ICS is used to manage resources at a high-rise incident. This SOP will deal primarily with the incident command aspects of a high-rise incident. More specific operational and tactical information will be detailed in the OPS 26-0 Operations for High-rise and Standpipe Equipped Buildings. High-rise specific positions (i.e.: Lobby Control, Building Systems, etc.) and assignments will be outlined in more detail here. HIGH-RISE RESOURCE DISPATCHING Due to the nature of high-rise incidents, the labor intensive operation, and the reflex time that typically exists between arrival and getting water on the fire floor, additional alarms should be considered quickly and early in the operation. Additional alarms: As soon as initial arriving companies suspect a working fire may exist in a high-rise building (i.e. multiple calls being received while enroute, smoke/fire showing from the exterior, reports from building occupants on arrival, etc.) the incident commander shall immediately call for a 2 nd Alarm, which would bring an additional 2 engines, 1 truck, 1 Medic and 1 B/C. A significant working fire in a commercial high rise should prompt the IC to immediately request 3 rd and 4th alarms as quickly as possible. Additional alarms beyond a 4 th will attempt to bring an equal amount of resources each, but will depend on city-wide resource availability and mutual-aid. Call additional alarms as soon as possible.

--- ICS 8-0 ---
HIGH-RISE INCIDENT INITIAL PRIORITIES Tactical level assignments of the initial units that arrive should be instituted based on the establishment of ALS-Base, in this order:  Attack-         Fire attack/Rescue/Search/Forcible Entry/Water/RIC/ Medical, etc.  Lobby-          Establishment of Lobby Control  Staging-        Establishment of Staging  Base-           Establishment of Base HIGH-RISE ASSIGNMENTS AND POSITIONS Below is an outline of positions, assignments and objectives to be completed at a high-rise incident. On arrival, and upon assignment from Command, resources should be deployed to address these, as outlined below. In all cases ultimate deployment of resources shall be determined, as needed, at the discretion of the on scene Incident Commander. Tactical level Div/Group Supervisors should be assigned as appropriate. Initial Arriving Fire Floor Operations (2 Engine, 1 Truck)    Go aloft to fire area.    Engine FAEs stay at ground level    Establish Command.    Initial fire suppression and search/evac On fire floor and floor above as needed.    Transfer Command to the 1st arriving BC Water Supply/FDC Standpipe Supply    Engine FAE’s at ground can get this started Fire Floor Division Supervisor    Initially assumed by a Captain after Working Command transferred.    A Battalion Chief should go aloft at some point and become Division Supervisor. Rapid Intervention Crew    Goes aloft to fire area, set up on floor below fire floor. Search/Evacuation    Search/evac the evacuation stairwell, as well as top floor.    Begin a top down search/evac of floors above the fire area. Medical Group    Begin set up for triage/treatment/transport of civilian patients