OFD BATTALION CHIEF EXAM — DETAILED STUDY NOTES
PERSONNEL SOPS
============================================================


--- PERS 1-0 ---
FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS Fire Chief - 2620    As provided in the Charter of the City of Omaha, the Fire Department consists of the Chief of the Fire Department and such other officers, members and employees as the Mayor, from time to time, prescribes by ordinance.    The Chief of the Fire Department is a civil service position selected through competitive testing and personal interviews and confirmed by the Mayor.    Shall be the Department's commanding officer and shall be responsible to the Mayor for the proper administration and efficient operation of the Department.    Shall effect such organization of the Department as deemed expedient, and shall set forth the policies and procedures essential for its efficient operation.    Shall ensure that the condition of the Department's apparatus, buildings, tools and equipment, and the status of training and firefighting are maintained in a state of readiness and shall render an annual report to the Mayor.    Shall assign officers or other subordinates to administer the work of all Divisions in the Department and shall give them the necessary authority to properly administer such offices committed to their charge.    Shall hold subordinate officers responsible for any negligence in enforcement of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or order applicable to the Department.    Shall have the authority to administer discipline in accordance with Personnel Rules and Regulations and other directives of the Department.    Shall have the authority to assign all uniformed personnel to fire operations duties and shall make or require to be made all assignments, transfers, and details that will be in the best interest of the Department and the general public.    Shall prescribe specifications for protective clothing and other uniforms to be worn by the employees of the Department.    Shall have authority to issue such administrative rules and regulations as are necessary to govern the conduct of the members of the Department.    At such time as directed by the Mayor, the Chief shall prepare and submit a budget that outlines the costs and expenses of providing for and maintaining the Department during the subsequent fiscal year. Assistant Fire Chief - 2610    Shall be equal in rank to each other and subordinate in rank to the Fire Chief, and, in the absence of the Chief, assume the duties and authority of the Chief on a designated basis as directed by the Fire Chief.
   Serve on the General Staff of the Fire Chief and assist in the formulation and administration of the annual budget, Department policy, rules and regulations, and practices and procedures governing personnel and operation of the Department.    Be responsible for the functional operations of the Fire Department and assume command responsibilities at emergencies in accordance with the Department's Incident Command System.    May be appointed as City Fire Marshal and carry out all duties as are assigned to that position. Battalion Fire Chief - 8150    Be of equal rank to each other and subordinate in rank to Assistant Chief.    Supervise and direct the activities of all fire companies within an assigned district of the City. Be extremely familiar with Department's Incident Command and High Rise Command Systems.    Visit each company or unit over which they have supervision at frequent intervals; witness drills, make such inspections as necessary to determine that the proper care and attention is being given to all Department Property.    Make investigations, heed evidence of neglect or inefficiency, and take necessary action to correct any deficiencies in their commands as required.    Have authority to prohibit the use of any uniform, tool, appliance, implement, or equipment that is unfit for service.    When hazardous conditions of an emergency nature are found in areas of their command, promptly supervise an inspection of the affected premises and report the conditions to the Fire Prevention and Education Division    Supervise company fire prevention inspections within their assigned Fire Management Zones. Conduct such fire code inspections as required by the Department Fire Marshal.    When assigned to Divisions other than Fire Operations, be responsible for the efficiency and effectiveness of their Division under the direction of the Assistant Chief. Fire Marshal    The Fire Prevention Code of the Omaha Fire Department provides for the Office of the Fire Marshal of the City of Omaha. This position is to be held, and the duties performed by the Chief of the Fire Department.    The Chief of the Department may appoint a Deputy from the ranks of Assistant Fire Chief or Battalion Fire Chief who shall represent the Fire Chief and perform the duties of the Fire Marshal which include: o Directing the operation of the Fire Prevention and Education Division o Serving as the Fire Department representative at the Planning Board
o Advising the Fire Chief on matters of fire and life safety as to existing State and Local fire codes Assistant Fire Marshal - 8130    Is subordinate in rank to Battalion Chief, and, in the absence of the Fire Marshal, assumes the duties and authority of the Fire Marshall on a designated basis as directed by the Fire Chief.    Supervise and direct the activities of the sworn personnel engaged in inspections to detect fire hazards.    Assists with the coordination of the Fire Management Zone program.    Supervises and participates in fire prevention inspections made as the result of applications for permits issued by the Fire Department    Supervises the processing of information concerning fire hazards, including completing after action reports arising from complaints and requests.    Reviews blueprints of building to ensure that the buildings comply with fire ordinances. EMS Shift Supervisor - 8120    Is subordinate in rank to Battalion Chief, and, in the absence of the Emergency Medical Services Chief, assumes the duties and authority of the Emergency Medical Services Chief on a designated basis as directed by the Fire Chief.    Assists with research and development for Emergency Medical Services programs.    Supervise and direct the activities of the sworn personnel engaged in emergency medical services and training for the Omaha Fire Department.    Supervises and participates in planning and conducting classes in prescribed phases of the emergency medical training program.    Supervises and participates in emergency medical drill functions.    Assists with scheduling of personnel and classes in emergency medical services.    Supervises and participates in the training of new Fire Department candidates. Fire Captain - 8070    Be equal in rank to each other and subordinate in rank to Battalion Chief    Be in command of a fire company and in some cases a fire station during an assigned shift, and perform related department work.    Be thoroughly familiar with their response territories    Be thoroughly familiar with department’s Incident Command    Ensure that all equipment and apparatus assigned to their command is properly cared for and protected.
   Train and instruct members of their commands, through daily training sessions to ensure that the efficiency and effectiveness of their command is maintained.    Direct their unit in making fire prevention inspections of designated occupancies with their assigned company Fire Management Zone.    When given assignments other than fire operations, perform those duties in an efficient, effective manner.    Conduct a formal roll call at their apparatus at the prescribed time of shift change. Acting Officers    Have the authority of the position, in which they are acting, be charged with the knowledge and responsibilities of their positions, and be held accountable for the proper execution of the duties of the rank.    Be accorded all the privileges pertaining to the positions they temporarily occupy, and be obeyed and respected accordingly. All Fire Department Officers    Shall be responsible for the enforcement of discipline and the promotion and maintenance of efficiency of the commands and consider it their duty to set especially good examples and require their commands to maintain the high standards of the Department.    Within the commands, put into effect the authorized policies, regulations, practices and procedures as prescribed by the Fire Chief.    Be familiar with the general requirements of their commands in order to assume their responsibilities and effectively discharge their duties.    In sudden emergencies, decide promptly any question of doubt on the part of their subordinates relative to the interpretation of regulations or orders and shall prescribe the immediate action to be taken.    Respond to alarms and special calls in accordance with requirements and Department policy, and assume command and direct operations of all incidents until relieved by a superior officer.    When in charge at the scene of any emergency, have full power and authority to direct the operation of same. In the course of such operations, prohibit approach to such emergency by any person, vehicle, or thing, and to cause to be removed and kept away from such emergency any vehicle, or thing, and all persons not actually or usefully employed in the mitigation of such incident or preservation of property.    Cause all fires to be extinguished with the least possible danger to life and property, prevent unnecessary damage from water or overhaul, take proper precautions against rekindle, and leave the premises in as safe and secure condition as is practical.    Keep the Communications Center and their immediate supervisor informed of their status at all times while on duty.
   Be responsible for the correct notation in journals of all orders, directions, and other information having general application to the operation of their respective commands and apprise their relief’s of occurrences incidental to their tour of duty.    Preserve all orders, notices, communications, and records pertaining to the operation of their respective units, until the purpose of such records has been served.    Be responsible for the completeness, accuracy, and routing of all reports with which they are concerned; refrain from intercepting or unnecessarily delaying any report or communications in transit and where such reports involve questions of Department policy, forward them promptly to the Fire Chief through the established chain of command.    Promptly investigate and make oral reports to their commanding officers of any unusual occurrences concerning the Department; when required, make written reports containing the facts of the case and forward promptly through channels to the Fire Chief.    Take precautionary measures to prevent the exposure of members to unnecessary danger while on duty.    Be just, dignified, and firm in their relations with subordinates, and see that good order and proper discipline are maintained. Develop those qualities of leadership which command respect and confidence of subordinates and as an officer be exemplary in personal appearance and manner of speech.    Require subordinates to comply with all orders, regulations, practices and procedures of the Department and applicable Federal or State laws or City ordinances.    Avoid interference in matters or operations for which any officer of equal rank is responsible, except as directed by a superior officer.    Relinquish to a superior officer, to be exercised at his/her discretion, any authority which the subordinate officer may have held.    All officers shall acquire a thorough knowledge of physical conditions throughout their fire management zone to include: o All auxiliary water supplies that could be used for fire extinguishment; o Structural conditions of buildings; o Extraordinary hazards; o Locations and functions of auxiliary firefighting and alarm systems.    Officers, managers and supervisors shall make honest and fully factual reports in all oral and written communications. All entries in company journals or on any other Department form shall receive the same reporting. Failure to do so will be cause for disciplinary action, up to discharge, depending on the circumstances.    Cause all fires to be extinguished with the least possible danger to those involved. Use the principles of established tactical priorities (rescue, fire control, and property conservation) to conduct emergency operations and to take proper precautions against
rekindle.  Every effort will be made to explain our procedures in effecting extinguishment and further, to leave the premises secure. FIRE DEPARTMENT FIREFIGHTERS Fire Apparatus Engineer - 8030    Drive and operate their apparatus in a safe manner, with due regard for Department orders pertaining to emergency response and the welfare of the public.    Under the supervision of their respective commanding officers, be responsible for the condition and operation of apparatus to which they are assigned and be held strictly accountable for the readiness of such apparatus for service. The Engineer shall be particularly observant of the operating efficiency of their apparatus and promptly inform their immediate supervisor of any defects or irregularities that may affect operation or immediate response.    Be thoroughly familiar with the topography, physical conditions, street names, numbers, locations, and other matters effecting response in their first and greater alarm territories. The Engineer shall operate their apparatus in strict accordance with existing weather, types of thoroughfare and other existing conditions which would tend to affect the safe operation of motor vehicles.    Engineers shall have knowledge of hydrants and firefighting water supplies in their 1st alarm territories.    As an Engineer, be familiar with Department practices and procedures relative to water supply, hose streams, pump operations, apparatus placement, and other essentials, to enable them to efficiently perform their duties.    Possess an appropriate valid driver’s license issued by their State of Residence. Be thoroughly familiar with the Nebraska Vehicle Code and the City of Omaha traffic ordinances.    When exiting or entering a station, the Engineer shall ensure that the overhead station door is in a fully open position.    Shall ensure that the proper forms are available for traffic accident reporting and shall also assist their commanding officer in completing same when necessary.    When assigned to other than fire operations, judiciously perform duties as directed. Firefighter - 8010    Be equal in rank to each other and subordinate in rank to Fire Captain.    Perform their duties under direct supervision of their company officer unless otherwise assigned.    Become familiar with the Rules and Regulations, General Orders, and Standard Operating Guidelines of the Department.
   Promptly respond with their companies to all alarms or other emergencies assigned to them and shall assist one another when executing the orders of their superior officers.    Remain with their apparatus under the direction and supervision of their immediate supervisor when their company is not immediately ordered to work at fires or other emergencies,    Participate in company drills and other instructional training as directed.    Perform Fire Prevention Inspections, Pre-Fire Inspections, Equipment Maintenance, Station Maintenance and other such duties as may be directed by their company officers In addition to emergency duty and as a condition of their employment.    All newly appointed Firefighters shall be required to successfully complete a probationary training period of 12 months after leaving the training academy.    Promptly notify the responsible officer or supervisor who shall take appropriate corrective action whenever a dangerous or unsafe condition within the Department's jurisdiction is observed or called to their attention.    Perform such other duties as their superior officers may direct FIRE DEPARTMENT SPECIALTIES EMT - Paramedic Specialist Qualifications The paramedic course consists of approximately 600 classroom hours, 250 clinical hours and 2000 hours of field internship. Field internship completion is based on a minimum number of skills, patient age categories, pathologies, complaints and team leader skills, so final total hours will vary. The curriculum follows the 1998 U. S. Department of Transportation National Standard Curriculum for EMT-Paramedic. National Registry EMT – Paramedic Certification/Recertification Successful completion of the National Registry is required for initial Nebraska paramedic certification. Upon National Registry exam completion, a certificate from National Registry is issued with a two-year expiration period, which is due by March 31st of the applicable year. National Registry recertification requirements (due every two years): 48 hours of paramedic refresher, 24 hours of continuing education, current BLS provider and ACLS provider. Nebraska EMT – Paramedic Certification / Recertification Nebraska EMT-P certification is required to practice as a paramedic in the state of Nebraska. Upon successful completion of the National Registry exam and obtaining National Registry EMT- P certification, application for paramedic in the state of Nebraska is completed with the Dept. of HHSS. The Dept. of HHSS is responsible for issuing state certification. Nebraska paramedic
certification requires recertification every two years. Recertification is due on December 31 st of the applicable year. Recertification requirements (every two years): Current National Registry paramedic certification or 40 hours of continuing education, 20 of the 40 hours must be paramedic level, current BLS provider and ACLS provider, competency evaluation / validation from Medical Director. Continuing Education 48 hours of paramedic refresher (set up as 24 hours per year at present), ACLS provider recertification every two years, 16 hours of continuing education. Certification Must be certified by the Omaha Fire Department Medical Director to function as a paramedic. Hazmat Technician Specialist Qualifications OFD employee shall successfully complete any HazMat Technician Course that meets or exceeds the EPA guidelines for HazMat Technician. Personnel who have successfully completed an approved Hazmat Technician course, shall be provided the opportunity participate in the following training as it becomes available:    High Angle Rescue    Confined Space Rescue    Trench Rescue    WMD training specific to Rescue 33’s equipment and response role - o Nuclear o Chemical o Biological    RIC training - o Infrared Camera training    Radiological response training - o Use of meters o Radiological instrumentation course    HazMat - o Railcar response o DOT fuel tanker response o Off-loading fuel tankers school
o Use of Level A equipment o Technician Decontamination procedures Fire Investigator In order to be considered as a potential candidate for the Omaha Police Academy, an employee of the Omaha Fire Department (OFD) shall complete an application process as stipulated by Fire Administration and the Fire Investigation Unit Battalion Chief. The OFD employee shall successfully undergo a comprehensive background investigation conducted by the Omaha Police Department (OPD) Backgrounds Unit, which includes: • Criminal History Review • Polygraph or Voice Stress Testing • Toxicological and Drug Screening Upon successful completion of the background investigation, the OFD employee shall participate in and graduate from the 24-week Omaha Police Recruit Academy. During the academy, the candidate shall demonstrate proficiency in the following assessments: • Physical Fitness and Agility Evaluation • Cognitive Assessments: A series of tests evaluating knowledge in various areas of law enforcement. • Performance Assessments: Evaluating the ability to perform critical skills and tasks essential to law enforcement duties. • Comprehensive Examinations: Assessments designed to test the candidate's ability to recall and apply previously learned material and demonstrate competency in law enforcement operations. Following the academy graduation, the OFD employee shall complete a modified Field Training Program with the Uniformed Patrol Bureau, ensuring they meet the requisite operational standards of both the OPD and OFD. Specialist Qualifications Nebraska Certified Law Enforcement Officer The OFD employee shall achieve Nebraska Certified Law Enforcement Officer status, as determined by the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center (NLETC). This certification can be obtained through any law enforcement agency in Nebraska, not necessarily the Omaha Police Department. This certification constitutes the minimum prerequisite for consideration for a position in the Fire Investigation Unit.
In addition to obtaining law enforcement certification, the candidate shall meet the following specialized qualifications for inclusion in the Fire Investigation Unit: Completion of Specialized Coursework, including: 1. Fire Investigation Essentials or a Basic Origin and Cause Course 2. Interviewing/Interrogation Techniques, Case Preparation, and Expert Testimony in Court Training Entities Recognized for Certification: • National Fire Academy (NFA) • International Association of Arson Investigators (IAAI) • National Association of Fire Investigators (NAFI) • Oklahoma State University • Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) Note: This list is not exclusive. Other training entities may also be acceptable upon review and approval. NFPA 1033: Standard for Professional Qualifications for Fire Investigator According to NFPA 1033, fire investigators shall complete initial training in the fundamental principles of fire investigation. This training shall cover the following critical domains: • Fire Origin and Cause Determination • Fire Behavior and Patterns • Evidence Collection and Preservation • Fire Scene Documentation (e.g., photographs, sketches, written notes) • Witness and Suspect Interviewing • Fire Investigation Tools and Equipment Utilization Fire investigators are expected to possess requisite knowledge in the following scientific domains to competently perform fire investigation tasks: 1. Fire Science • Chemical and Physical Properties of Fire • Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer • Fire Dynamics and Behavior • Explosion Dynamics and Kinetics 2. Fire Investigation Techniques • Fire Analysis and Interpretation • Methodology of Fire Investigations • Fire Investigation Technology and Tools
•   Documentation, Collection, and Preservation of Evidence •   Failure Analysis and Forensic Examination Techniques 3. Fire Scene Safety and Hazard Management • Hazard Identification, Risk Assessment, and Mitigation Protocols • Hazardous Materials Handling and Safety Procedures • Safety Standards and Regulations 4. Building Systems and Construction • Structural Fire Resistance and Building Codes • Fire Protection and Suppression Systems • Electrical Systems and Wiring in Fire Events • Fuel Gas Systems and Their Role in Fire Dynamics NFPA 921: Guide for Fire and Explosion Investigations Fire investigators are required to possess an in-depth understanding of fire science as outlined in NFPA 921, with specific emphasis on the mechanics of fire initiation, propagation, and behavior. This includes: • comprehension of ignition sources • fire spread patterns • the role of combustible materials in fire escalation Continuing Education and Certification Maintenance Law Enforcement Officer Certification (LEO) Mandatory annual in-service training as prescribed by the Omaha Police Department, including: Firearms Qualification. 32 hours of continuing education annually, including courses on: • De-escalation techniques, mental health, and substance abuse awareness • Anti-bias and implicit bias training (minimum of 2 hours) • Legal updates, including constitutional law and legislative changes
Certified Fire/Explosion Investigator (CFI, CFEI) Certification Accredited by: National Board of Fire Service Professional Qualifications (Pro Board) Forensic Specialties Accreditation Board (FSAB) Certified fire investigators must maintain their certification by completing: 40 hours of continuing education every five years, combined with verified professional experience. Training through formal programs offered by recognized training institutions or agencies: • National Fire Academy • International Association of Arson Investigators (IAAI) • National Association of Fire Investigators (NAFI) • Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) • Oklahoma State University • Eastern Kentucky University Note: This list is not exclusive. Other training entities may also be acceptable upon review and approval.
PERSONNEL 3-0 CODE OF CONDUCT & FIREFIGHTER CODE OF ETHICS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION        DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 2        Updates to leave requests     June 2016      Miranda 919      Bernard 892       McCormick 638 Notification of criminal 3                                      Jan 2022      McCormick 638       Ryan 679          Olsen 640 conduct, pg 7 PURPOSE AND POLICIES A functional set of policies and procedures written up as a code of conduct enables a large department to establish expected norms of behavior by incorporating a standardized disciplinary procedure with the code of conduct so employees can know what to expect for infractions of the code. The purpose of this section is to set forth in one standard instruction the code of conduct for this department. This code of conduct is intended to provide interpretive assistance when referring to the Union contract and City Personnel rules, but is in no way meant to supersede them. It is the Fire Department's policy to be consistent in its application of disciplinary measures established in this code. However, each case must be viewed separately and judged upon the facts. Extenuating circumstances will be considered where it is appropriate. These rules and regulations are not designed nor intended to limit members in the exercise of their judgment or initiative in taking action any reasonable person would take under unusual circumstances. CODE OF CONDUCT Pledge As a firefighter, my primary duty is to protect the lives and property of all the citizens of Omaha without regard to economic or social status. As a firefighter, I pledge that I will set a good example in all my actions and deeds. I will never use my position for personal gain, recognizing it as a symbol of public trust. I will consistently strive to achieve the high objectives of this Department, and I shall conduct myself at all times, both on and off duty, in such a manner as to reflect most favorably upon the City of Omaha and the Fire Department. General Rules 1. All employees shall understand, be familiar with and comply with the Standard Operating Procedures.

--- PERS 3-0 ---
2. It shall be the responsibility of each employee to: a. Report at the prescribed hour and place assigned, ready to competently and efficiently perform required duties. b. Complete their regular tour of duty unless absence is authorized by a signed trade- time agreement with leave request completed and submitted accordingly. c. Be available and mentally and physically prepared for emergency assignment. d. Carry the Fire Department identification card at all times. Loss or finding of I.D. card shall be reported immediately, in writing, to the Fire Chief through channels. e. Accord obedience and proper respect to officers and acting officers. f. Have and maintain uniform in compliance with Department specifications. g. Keep the Department informed of their correct address of residence, telephone number, and report changes to the Department within 24-hours after making such change. h. Avoid exceeding authority in giving orders. Upon receiving any order that is in conflict with a previous order, so inform the officer who issued the conflicting order and be governed by his/her instructions. An employee acting in obedience to a reasonable, yet improper order shall be protected against penalty. The term reasonable order shall be construed as any order in keeping with the performance of any duty prescribed by Department policies, procedures or rules and regulations, or for the preservation of good order, efficiency and proper discipline which is not in conflict with Department regulations. i.   Address Captains and Chief Officers by their title, when appropriate to do so. j.   Notify the Department of any change in marital or dependency status. k. Not violate federal, state, county, or municipal laws. l.   Property: wear, maintain and keep clean all items of personal clothing and equipment issued to him or her by the City or purchased by the employee in accordance with Departmental specifications. 3. All employees shall work harmoniously with their fellow employees. Actions leading to lower job morale, less efficient teamwork, or the ostracism of a fellow firefighter will not be tolerated. 4. Employees shall not recommend or suggest to the general public in any manner, when acting in their official capacity, the employment or procurement of a particular product, private, professional or commercial service. 5. Employees shall not fabricate an illness or injury, falsely report themselves ill or injured or otherwise deceive or attempt to deceive any official of this Department as to the condition of their health. Employees taking sick leave may be required to be examined by their physician or be subject to an examination by a City appointed physician. Employees on sick leave, or I.O.D. are expected to be at home, or at a doctor's office unless hospitalized. If any other arrangements are approved by the Fire Chief or
his/her designee, the appropriate Assistant Chief is to be informed of the address and phone number where the employee can be reached. 6. Employees shall submit all necessary reports and forms on time and in accordance with established Department procedures. Reports submitted shall be truthful and complete and no members shall knowingly enter or allow to be entered any inaccurate, false, or improper information. 7. All employees have the right to join labor organizations. Firefighters shall not engage in any strike. As used in this section "strike" means any concerted action to withhold from the full faithful performance of the duties of employment for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change in wages, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment, including but not limited to, a failure to report to duty, an absence from duty without authorized leave, sickness unsubstantiated by a physician's statement, the stoppage or slowdown of work or a failure to perform the full range of duties as directed. 8. Employees shall pay their just debts promptly. 9. Employees shall treat as confidential the official business of the Department. They shall not impart same to anyone except those to whom it is intended or as directed by their commanding officer. Employee shall give all proper information to persons requesting same in a careful, courteous, and accurate manner, avoiding all unnecessary conversation or controversy; and shall give their name and I.D. number in a respectful manner to any person who may request it. 10. Employees shall not use their own personal vehicles for any assignment while on duty unless authorized to do so by their immediate supervisor. When driving, employee shall observe all traffic laws and set a courteous example of good driving. Unauthorized personnel shall not be allowed to ride in Department vehicles. Department vehicles shall be used for official business only. 11. With the exception of grocery shopping for their station, employees shall not shop or trade while on duty, nor devote any of their on-duty time to any activity other than Fire Department business. 12. Employees shall be prohibited from the possession or use of gunpowder, ammunition, ammunition reloading materials, explosives, firearms, or other lethal weapons or substances while in quarters or in the performance of their duties. This does not preclude the Fire Chief from making an exception to the above for certain personnel when it is in accordance with their assigned departmental functions. Example, fire cause investigators. 13. Employees are prohibited from consuming alcoholic beverages while on duty. Furthermore, employees are prohibited from consuming or serving alcoholic beverages while in uniform, whether on-duty or off-duty. There is a limited exception to this rule which should be interpreted narrowly as follows: Charter, members of the Omaha Fire Department may be authorized by the Chief
of the department, or their designee, to wear appropriate uniforms for authorized functions while not on duty. b. If the Chief, or the Chief’s designee, authorizes Omaha Fire Department personnel to wear uniforms for an off-duty function and authorizes the consumption of alcoholic beverages at that function, uniformed fire department personnel may consume alcoholic beverages while at the authorized function, provided the individual’s consumption of alcohol is in compliance with all Federal, State, and local laws, statutes, and ordinances. c. In addition, Omaha Fire Department personnel must remain aware that their conduct while in a fire department uniform reflects directly on the Omaha Fire Department and the City of Omaha. As a result, conduct deemed inappropriate by d. Employees shall at no time bring into the stations, or keep in or about the stations or premises of the Department any intoxicating liquor. They shall not report for duty at their particular assignment under the influence of any intoxicating liquor. e. When reasonable suspicions exist indicating the employee may be under the influence of any intoxicating liquor while on duty, or while in uniform off-duty, he/she shall be required to submit to a physical examination or appropriate chemical tests administered by the Department physician or any other authorized agency when ordered to do so by the Fire Chief. Refusal to submit to such an examination or test shall be deemed a violation of a direct order and insubordination. 14. Employees shall not use or possess any illegally controlled substance while on or off- duty. They shall not report for duty at their place of assignment under the influence of any illegal controlled substance nor have any of these items in their possession at any time. When reasonable suspicion exists indicating that employees may be under the influence of any illegal controlled substance while on or off duty, they shall be required to submit to physical examination or appropriate chemical tests administered by the department physician or any other authorized agency when ordered to do so by the Fire Chief or higher authority. Refusal to submit to such examination or test shall be deemed a violation of a direct order and insubordination. 15. All uniformed employees shall maintain, and have in their possession at all times an appropriate, valid driver's license. 16. Employee shall not accept employment outside City service or participate actively in the management or operation of any business or enterprise that: a. is incompatible with their City employment or would result in a conflict of interest with their responsibilities and obligations to the City; b. could result in criticism or discredit to the City;
c. would prolong recovery while on I.O.D. or sick leave, or while on light duty assignment; d. would involve time demands that would render performance of his/her Department duties less efficient; e. would cause the employee to be absent from duty. 17. Any employee who attempts to shield or cover up an improper action on the part of another employee shall become subject to disciplinary action. Emergency Duty 1. At a fire or other emergency, unless otherwise ordered by a superior officer, officers shall remain with their companies. All members shall remain with the company to which they are assigned, unless otherwise directed by proper authorities. 2. All companies and medic units shall remain in their assigned first alarm zones unless dispatched to an emergency incident or having prior permission from their immediate superior officer to be out of their designated zones. 3. It shall be the responsibility of all on-duty members of the Department to respond to alarms to which their unit is assigned unless excused by a superior officer. In no case will fatigue from duty at a previous alarm be accepted as an excuse for failure to answer an alarm. 4. Whenever the Department is confronted with situations involving an explosion, serious injury, or loss of life in connection with the fire cause, evidence of incendiary or suspicion of arson, undetermined origin, malicious action, and arrest or detention of a suspect for any cause, missing valuables from a fire scene, and on all second or greater alarms, the officer in charge shall promptly request a fire cause investigator be dispatched to the scene. 5. Members of companies working at fires during the change of shift hours shall be relieved only on order of the officer in charge. 6. Only members of the Department and such persons as have been granted permission by the Fire Chief shall be allowed to ride on apparatus. 7. Officers in charge of fire apparatus are not authorized to accept the services of civilians to engage in structural firefighting. 8. Any member receiving a complaint of theft or loss of valuables at the scene of an incident shall immediately report same to the commanding officer who shall call for a fire investigator. The fire investigator and the officer in charge of the fire shall make an investigation and report through channels to the Fire Chief. As required, assistance from Omaha Police Department shall be requested. 9. All monies, jewels, or similar valuables discovered by members at incidents shall be immediately reported to their superior officer. The officer in charge of the fire incident shall decide the deposition of the articles after contacting Omaha Police.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                               PERS 3-0 10. The Incident Commander shall report to the Fire Chief through normal channels the names and circumstances of any members who distinguish themselves in the performance of their duties. See (ADM 9-0). 11. Only persons authorized by the officer in charge shall be permitted to enter a building or premises in which the Department is conducting operations. 12. Whenever a request is made to the Department for equipment to admit persons locked out of their homes or places of business, the Officer responding shall determine the right of the person to enter the premises. In making this determination, the officer may use identification cards or seek verification from neighbors. If the officer is in doubt as to the right of the person to enter, they shall request that a police officer be dispatched to the scene. In case of a lock-in, the officer shall determine whether the circumstances require the services of a police officer before affecting the release of those locked in. 13. Company officers shall be responsible for inspecting the apparatus for any damage, missing tools, or equipment before leaving the scene of an emergency. Immediately following the return to quarters from an incident, drill, or test, they shall require that the apparatus under their charge be properly cleaned, inspected, serviced and housed. 14. Twenty-hundred (2000) hours, retirement time, is the time at which on-duty firefighters may retire to bed unless special consideration is granted by the Battalion Chief. General Rules of Conduct 1. In all matters of general conduct, members shall be governed by the ordinary and reasonable rules of behavior observed by self-respecting, law-abiding citizens, and shall commit no act tending to bring reproach or discredit upon the Department or its members. 2. Members shall not lend their names as a member of the Fire Department to any commercial enterprise, nor shall they approve or countenance the use of the name and prestige of the Department for any such purpose. 3. No member shall use the uniform, badge, or prestige of the Department to attempt to influence the vote of any person, either for or against any candidate for elective office. 4. No member shall distribute campaign literature, solicit or speak for or against any valid measure or candidate for elective office while on duty. 5. In all matters pertaining to the Department, members shall render prompt and unquestioned obedience to the orders of superiors. 6. A members deemed to have committed pilferage or shoplifting at fires or elsewhere shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including discharge. 7. Department members shall not enter any Department building, station, or quarters to remove or alter any piece of apparatus or equipment without clearance from the officer in charge except in the event of an emergency. 8. No member shall go off duty unless properly relieved by a superior officer. 9. Visitors shall not be permitted in the stations prior to 0800 hours or after 2000 hours. Members shall not be permitted to entertain visitors during work or drill periods.
10. Members shall stay physically fit. 11. Members shall be responsible for securing and maintaining their lockers and assigned storage spaces in a clean and orderly condition at all times. All lockers will be maintained in a locked and secured condition. 12. Members are forbidden to solicit or receive subscriptions or donations or influence any person to purchase tickets for any purpose in which the name of the Omaha Fire Department is either used or implied without the approval of the Fire Chief. 13. Members shall neither initiate arrangements to appear or use the name of the Omaha Fire Department on radio or television programs, nor shall they represent such Department on any broadcast or telecast without the specific approval of the Fire Chief. 14. All scheduled public appearances in representation of the Fire Department shall first be authorized. 15. All members must complete and file an OFD25 through their chain of command whenever they are arrested or receive a citation for any criminal conduct (violation of law) that requires the member to appear in Court. Any member deemed to have committed acts of a felonious nature is subject to discharge. 16. All members shall be truthful in all written and oral statements made to any superior officer or any officer who is investigating a matter that concerns the well-being of the Department. Failure to do so shall be cause for suspension, demotion or discharge depending upon circumstances. Buildings and Vehicles 1. Members and employees may be assigned Department owned vehicles, lockers, desks, cabinets, and cases for the mutual convenience of the Department and its personnel. All personnel are advised that the retention of personal items in such containers or facilities is at the risk of the employee and the Department will not be responsible for any losses. Such equipment is subject to entry and inspection without notice, even if the employee has placed a personally owned lock on this Departmental property. 2. Department furnishings in installations shall be properly maintained. Willful damage to such property shall be considered cause for disciplinary action. 3. Station grounds and outside yard areas shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner. All concrete driveways, walks and sidewalks forming a part of the Department property shall be maintained in a clean, snow and ice-free condition. 4. Repairs or improvements necessary to Departmental buildings, furnishings and other installations shall be promptly reported through normal channels. No alterations will be made without consent and approval of the Fire Chief. 5. Department buildings shall be maintained at a temperature conducive to good health.
Departmental Uniforms 1. Uniform items furnished by the City shall remain the property of the City; the Fire Chief shall establish regulations for the issuance and control thereof. 2. Whenever an officer ascertains that any part or parts of the uniform of a member under their supervision are in need of replacement or repair, the member shall initiate such procedures for replacement or repair as prescribed by the Fire Chief. Officers will be held strictly accountable for improperly clothed personnel under their command. 3. Members of the uniform force shall not loan any portion of their prescribed uniform to persons inside or outside the Department except by permission of the Fire Chief. 4. All members shall be provided with the badge of their rank which shall be worn as prescribed by the Fire Chief. Any member who has lost the official Department badge shall report the matter through normal channels within 24 hours. 5. Violations of rules, regulations, and general orders pertaining to the care and use of Fire Department uniforms shall be a disciplinary offense. Suspendable Offenses Suspendable offenses shall include, but not be limited to, offenses listed in the Union contract Article 6, Section 1 and the following: 1. Any conduct amounting to a violation of moral turpitude. 2. Fighting or physical action against another employee with resulting injury or property damage. 3. Failure by any employee to maintain appropriate valid driver's license. 4. Cheating on any Departmental examination or the unauthorized possession of any exam material. 5. Any violation of a general rule which in the judgment of the Fire Chief deserves suspension, especially repeated offenses. 6. Refusal to obey a direct order. Removable Offenses Removable offenses shall include, but not be limited to, those offenses listed in the Union contract Article 6, Section 1, and the following: 1. Use or possession of liquor while on duty. 2. Use or possession of illegal drugs, substances, or compounds while on or off duty. 3. Willful misconduct resulting in serious injury or large property loss. 4. Misappropriation of City material or any theft. 5. Any suspendable offense which in the judgment of the Fire Chief deserves removal, especially repeated suspendable offenses. 6. A felonious criminal activity.
7. Commission of any sexual act while on duty or any conduct amounting to a crime of moral turpitude. 8. Falsification of records or reports. Roll Call Officers in charge of Operation companies shall be responsible for conducting a formal roll call at their apparatus at 0700 hours each day. 1. All members shall be dressed in the appropriate uniform. 2. All personnel accountability tags shall be collected and placed on the appropriate color coded labeled tag/unit collector ring at this time. 3. All members shall be inspected for suitability of uniform and personal fitness for duty. 4. General Orders, Bulletins, and any other communications shall be read at this time. 5. The day's work schedule shall be presented to all company members at this time. 6. Failure to conduct a formal roll call is cause for disciplinary action. Tardiness 1. When an employee of the on-coming shift fails to report to his/her place of assignment, at the time of shift change, the respective Battalion Chief (immediate supervisor for 40 hour personnel) shall be notified immediately. The Battalion Chief will call the Operations Assistant Chief requesting relief or disposition for filling the vacant position. If the respective Battalion Chief is not available, notify the Operations Assistant Chief. This notification shall take place immediately upon becoming aware of the tardiness. 2. The employee who is tardy shall submit an OFD 25 to his/her immediate supervisor documenting all pertinent information regarding the tardiness. 3. All tardiness shall be reported as unauthorized leave and time lost shall be documented the individuals WorkForce time sheet as Without Pay. It shall be the responsibility of the immediate supervisor to notify the chain of command (with NO exception) of all tardiness and the time period when the tardiness occurred. Failure to do so by a supervisor shall result in disciplinary action being taken against the supervisor. 4. Instances of tardiness shall be progressively disciplined in the following manner over a two-year period: a. First Offense: The immediate supervisor shall investigate and formally discuss with the employee this tardiness. The individual’s time sheet shall document the time absent with a loss of pay for time absent. b. Second Offense: The Immediate Supervisor shall formally warn the employee. The individual’s time sheet shall document the time absent with a loss of pay for time absent. The Fire Chief’s office will issue a written reprimand to the employee’s immediate supervisor, who will present it to the employee and have them sign it. The written reprimand will then be returned via the chain of command to the Fire Chief.
c. Third Offense: The same procedure as the second offense shall be followed. The employee will receive an 8-hour suspension without pay plus loss of pay for time absent. d. Fourth Offense: The same procedure as the second offense shall be followed. The employee will receive a 24-hour suspension without pay plus loss of pay for time absent. e. Fifth Offense: The same procedure as the second offense shall be followed. The employee will receive a 72-hour suspension without pay plus loss of pay for time absent. f. Sixth Offense: The same procedure as the second offense shall be followed. The employee will receive a five (5) day suspension and will be subject to termination at the discretion of the Fire Chief. NOTE: Management reserves, but is not bound by, the option to refer the employee to a psychologist for evaluation in situations of repeated offenses. Such referral is not considered disciplinary action. Overall job performance will be considered along with the tardiness in utilizing such option. Absence Without Leave Unauthorized absence from duty of any employee shall be followed by forfeiture of pay for the time absent and charges shall be preferred unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief. An unexplained absence without leave of any employee for three consecutive shifts will be deemed and held as a resignation and treated as such. Marking Official Notices Employees shall not mark, mar, deface, or alter any printed or written notices in relation to Fire Department business. Special Orders Any order posted on the bulletin boards of the Department over the signature or name of the Fire Chief shall have the same effect and be construed the same as part of the rules and regulations of this Department. Marking of Department Property Employees shall not make any unauthorized mark, mar, or alter any Fire Department property. Security of City Issued Equipment Employees shall be personally responsible for the security of all equipment issued and charged to each employee. Loss of City provided equipment may be charged to the employee for reimbursement to the City. Maintenance of City Issued Equipment 1. Turn-out clothing shall be washed in non-detergent soap and water.
2. Helmets shall not be altered in any way. a. Holes shall not be drilled in helmets b. No decals, except those authorized by the Fire Chief c. No flash lights shall be attached that modify the helmet integrity or affect helmet safety features d. Video or image capturing equipment is not authorized for use or wear by OFD personnel Conflict of Interest and Employee Conduct 1. Purpose a. The purposes of this regulation is to: i.    Summarize in a single document a code of ethics and acceptable employee conduct that will apply equally to all employees, regardless of individual job duties and responsibilities. ii.    Emphasize that each employee in our City occupies a position of public trust that demands the highest moral and ethical standards of conduct. iii.   Insure that citizens are given efficient, productive and high quality services in a courteous, impartial manner. Such services shall be equally available, with no special advantage given to any citizen beyond that available to all citizens. b. Policies and regulations governing the conduct of Department employees appear rules. Employees shall familiarize themselves with the pertinent sections of these documents and consult them as necessary for information and guidance. 2. Scope This regulation applies to all employees of the Omaha Fire Department. 3. Policy a. Responsibility of Ethical Conduct It is the responsibility of all Fire Department employees to engage in ethical behavior and practices. Every employee is responsible for both the actual and perceived conflict of interest that may arise as a result of the employee’s actions. It is the employee’s responsibility to reduce or eliminate to the extent possible actual and perceived conflicts of interest. b. Responsibility of Public Service Fire Department Employees All Fire Department employees are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska and to abide by the laws of the nation, state, and the City. They are bound to observe in their official acts, the highest standards of integrity and to discharge faithfully the duties of their position, recognizing that the lives, safety, health, and welfare of the general public must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should
be above reproach to assure that the public position is not used nor perceived as being used for personal gain. The conduct of all employees shall be such as to provide the best public service to each citizen and the community as a whole. The conduct of all employees shall be consistent with the goals and values of this organization. c. General Rules Regarding Conflict of Interest Employees shall not engage in any business or transaction and shall not have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or would tend to impair their independence, judgment, or action in the performance of such duties. d. Acceptance of Favors, Gifts and Gratuities Members of the Fire Department shall not accept money or other consideration or favors from anyone other than the City for the performance of an act which they would be required or expected to perform in the regular course of their duties. This prohibition would not normally include items such as plaques, souvenirs, or mementos of nominal value often associated with a given event. A person shall not accept gifts, gratuities, or favors of any kind that might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence their action with respect to City of Omaha business. e. Outside Employment i.    Notification and Departmental Approval. Persons employed with the Omaha Fire Department who is engaged in any outside business activity or employment shall notify the Fire Chief in writing using an OFD 37. Persons contemplating such business activity or employment shall obtain Departmental approval before accepting such employment (See PERS 3-3). ii.    General Prohibition. Fire Department employees shall not engage in any employment or business activity which is incompatible or in conflict with the duties, function, or responsibilities of the Department, or the employee. Activities which may constitute a conflict include: use of their City time, facilities, equipment, and supplies, or the use of a badge, uniform, prestige or influence of their Departmental employment for private gain or advantage. An employee shall not engage in any business activity or employment, which by its nature, hours or physical demands, would impair the required quality or quantity of the employee's work with the Fire Department, impair the employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties, reduce the effectiveness or efficiency of the Department, reflect discredit on the Department, or tend to increase the Fire Department's payment for sick leave, workmen's compensation benefits, or long term disability. iii.   Specific Prohibitions a) Employees shall not review, approve, or issue a permit for work done by an outside employer.
b) Employees shall not attempt to influence the City’s review, approval, or issuance of a permit pertaining to c) Employees in supervisory positions shall not assign to a subordinate any work resulting from the supervisor's outside employment. f. Use of City Employment And Facilities for Private Gain Fire Department employees shall not use, for private gain or advantage, their City time or the City's facilities, equipment, or supplies. In addition, Department employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for themselves or others. g. Use of Confidential Information i.   Fire Department employees shall not use confidential information acquired by or available to them in the course of their employment with the Fire Department for speculation or personal gain. ii.   Fire Department employees shall not disclose confidential personal information acquired by or available to them in the course of their employment with the Fire Department except in the performance of their duties as required by law. h. Equal Employment Persons in the employ of the Fire Department shall not, in the performance of their service responsibilities, discriminate against any person on the basis of race, religion, color, creed, age, marital status, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual preference, medical condition, or handicap. they shall cooperate in achieving the equal employment opportunity and affirmative action goals and objectives of the Fire Department. i.   Favoritism i.   No supervisory or management employee shall: a) Directly supervise any immediate family member. (This does not apply to acting out of class assignments for 15 days or less.) b) Interfere with any performance evaluation or disciplinary proceeding for any immediate family member. c) Recommend or attempt to influence any contractor or business which has a business relationship with the City to employ a member of his/her immediate family or any other person with whom the employee has a close personal or business relationship. ii.   For the purpose of this Section, the term "immediate family" shall mean spouse, significant other, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in- law, sister, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, step-parent, step-child. j.   Product Endorsement
Fire Department employees, in their capacity as a City employee, shall not endorse a product or service or comment on that product or service if it is the intent of the solicitor of the endorsement or of the vendor or manufacturer of that product or service to use such comments for the purpose of advertisement. Fire Department employees are not prohibited from responding to inquiries regarding the effectiveness of products or services used by the City unless the employee is aware that it is the inquirers intention to use those comments for purposes of the advertisement. k. Duty to Disclose Every employee shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of any interest, direct or indirect, which may conflict with his responsibility or duty, or which because of his position may influence a decision to the benefit of the organization in which he has an interest. Such disclosure shall be in the form of a memorandum to the Fire Chief. l.   Duty to Cooperate Every employee shall cooperate fully with judicial bodies and courts, and with lawfully constituted investigative commissions, committees, bodies and juries; appear before them upon request; and answer all questions concerning his or her conduct in office or his or her performance of official duties or matters within his or her knowledge pertaining to the property, government, or affairs of the Omaha Fire Department. Failure to do so shall be cause for appropriate disciplinary action. Personal Use of City Equipment Prohibited 1. City labor, equipment, materials, and supplies shall not be used for personal or private purposes either on City premises, or elsewhere, by City employees or others unless specifically authorized to do so by the Fire Chief. The term City labor shall mean the use of the services of any city employee while he or she is being paid by and performing services for the Omaha Fire Department. The term City equipment and materials shall mean all City property, including hand tools, power tools, automotive equipment, office equipment and supplies, and construction materials. 2. Refer to the City Charter for the policy and concerning disposition of surplus stock. Every employee shall cooperate fully with judicial bodies and courts and with lawfully constituted investigative commissions, committees, bodies and juries; appear before them upon request and answer all questions concerning his or her conduct in office or his or her performance of official duties or matters within his or her knowledge pertaining to the property, government, or affairs of the Omaha Fire Department. Failure to do so shall be cause for appropriate disciplinary action. FIREFIGHTER’S CODE OF ETHICS As a firefighter, my fundamental duty is to serve mankind; to safeguard lives and property; and to respect the Constitutional rights of all to liberty, equality, and justice.
I will keep my private life unsullied as an example to all; maintain courageous calm in the face of danger, scorn, or ridicule; develop self-restraint; and be constantly mindful of the welfare of others. Honest in thought and deed in both my personal and official life, I will be exemplary in obeying the laws of the land and the regulations of the department. Whatever I see or hear of a confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity will be kept ever a secret unless revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty. I will never act officiously or permit personal feeling, prejudices, animosities or friendships to influence my decisions. I will perform my duties without fear or favor, malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary force or violence and never accepting gratuities. I recognize the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it, as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of the fire service. I will constantly strive to achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating myself before God to my chosen profession, fire prevention and operations.
PERSONNEL 3-1 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION         DATE REVISED        AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY        APPROVED BY 1                 New Format             Nov 2015        Hunter 723        McEvoy 680         Kanger 601 2           Update hyperlinks            Nov 2021      McCormick 638       McCaw 897           Olsen 640 PURPOSE The Omaha Fire Department, through each of its members, both individually and collectively, will firmly support and enforce all of the provisions of this equal employment opportunity policy. The Department will hire, develop, and promote well-qualified individuals in a way that will not deprive any individual of employment opportunities because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, or disability. The Department shall continue to direct its employment and personnel practices toward ensuring equal employment opportunities for everyone. All matters related to promotions, awards, discipline, transfers, job rotations, training, work assignments, hiring, merit increases, overtime, and related employment decisions shall be free from any discriminatory practice. Additionally, the Mayor’s Executive Order No. S-33-16 Prohibition Against Unlawful Discrimination can be referenced on the City of Omaha Human Resources Public Documents website. DEFINITIONS Discrimination:         Any employment practice or policy, however neutral in intent, and however fairly and impartially administered which has a disparate impact or treatment on any member because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, or disability. Harassment:             An offensive or hostile working environment created through inappropriate statements or actions, or treatment that is differential in its base and not in accordance with standard accepted policy or practice. Sexual Harassment: An infringement of an employee's right to work without sexual pressure of any type and is not limited to situations involving a male supervisor and a female subordinate. It includes all unwelcome sexual advances or actions from a person of either sex toward any person of the opposite or same sex and may well occur in an employment situation involving peers as well as supervisors.

--- PERS 3-1 ---
POLICY 1. All employees shall support the principles of our equal opportunity program. Supervisors shall be held accountable for enforcing any and all provisions of this policy as it relates to employees under their supervision. 2. All interviews conducted by an appointing authority shall be job related and shall be conducted in a non-discriminatory manner. 3. All employees shall work in an atmosphere free from discrimination, and any type of harassment. Discrimination, and harassment are not only illegal, but they create a negative atmosphere that reduces work productivity and morale, undermines the integrity of the work place, and destroys professionalism. It is the responsibility of all supervisors to assure that a harassment free and non-discriminatory work environment exists. The Omaha Fire Department is committed to providing a work environment free from degradation of any kind, thereby allowing every individual to maintain dignity and respect. Conduct that is professionally inappropriate, or the use of power, position or authority to take advantage of or degrade another person will not be tolerated.    The use of verbally derogatory racial, ethnic, and sexual epithets will not be tolerated.    Examples of discriminatory acts which shall not be tolerated include the use of derogatory comments, slurs or jokes, derogatory pictures, cartoons or posters; and any actions which result in an employee being treated differently because of their race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age, or disability.    Sexual harassment is an offensive working condition that shall not be tolerated. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, in its guidelines, has taken the view that the following conduct violates federal law:  Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal and/or physical conduct of sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment.  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual.  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.  Written examples of sexual harassment include suggestive or obscene letters, notes and invitations; verbal examples include derogatory comments, slurs or jokes; physical examples include assault, touching, impeding or blocking movements; and visual examples include leering, sexually-oriented gestures, or posters. Other examples include the threat or insinuation that lack of sexual favors will result in reprisal, withholding support for appointments, promotion or transfer, failure of probation punitive action, change of assignment, or a poor performance report.
Whether or not an alleged action constitutes sexual harassment will be determined by assessing the entire record and the totality of the circumstances on a case by case basis. Such factors as the nature of the sexual advances, and the context in which the alleged incidents occurred will be considered in analyzing the allegations and in determining the appropriate resolution. This policy is not to be construed as prohibiting mutually welcome social relationships between employees which have no bearing on employment decisions or benefits. Appropriate actions shall be initiated against anyone who violates this equal opportunity policy. (Appropriate action shall include progressive discipline up to and including termination.) An employee who feels that this policy is being violated shall report this to the appropriate supervisor, the Fire Department Equal Opportunity Liaison (FC2C), the City Labor Relations Director, or the Human Relations Department's Equal Employment Investigative Officer. Employees should also be aware of their right to contact State and/or Federal agencies to report violations of employment discrimination laws. The Fire Department Equal Opportunity Liaison Officer shall serve as the Equal Opportunity Counselor to employees of the Fire Department and the communicator of employee input to the Fire Chief. He/she shall be responsible for the coordination and overall achievement of the program and have full authority to perform these and all other responsibilities of the position. All employees shall cooperate fully with the EEO Liaison Officer in achieving full implementation of the Fire Department Equal Opportunity Program. SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS POLICY No person shall knowingly place, maintain, or display or allow or cause to be placed, maintained or displayed in any Fire Department work site or office, any pictorial material which exposes to the view of unwilling employees: 1. Illustrations depicting nudity or sexual conduct where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront or which create or tend to create a hostile work environment. 2. The display at Fire Department work sites and offices of pictorial material depicting nudity and sexual conduct which creates a hostile work environment and when exposed to the view of unwilling fellow employees or the public is patently offensive and harmful to personnel when readily visible to them and is therefore detrimental to maintaining a healthy working environment.                Such displays when thrust indiscriminately upon unwilling employees may constitute sexual harassment, assault of individual privacy, and interfere with the permissible access to our use of departmental work sites and offices. 3. Every employee is entitled to such permissible access to departmental work sites and offices without being subjected to offending displays of such materials. 4. The provisions and prohibitions contained in this policy are promulgated to secure and promote the lawful rights of employees of the Fire Department, its work sites and offices.
5. This order does not prohibit reading or personal possession of sexually oriented papers or magazines. It does, however, remind all employees that it is everyone's responsibility to ensure that all regulations are observed. It also reminds supervisors that they are responsible for enforcing all regulations and ensuring that the work place is free from any form of sexual harassment. 6. On those occasions where the programming offered on television is patently demeaning or offensive to some viewers, employees must be aware that such viewing may interfere with the rights of fellow employees. This decision is the responsibility of the Station Captain and/or Company Officers.
PERSONNEL 3-2 SPECIAL DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE LOSS OF DRIVER’S LICENSE REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION          DATE REVISED     AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1                New format              Nov 2015      Mandina 654      McEvoy 680         Kanger 601 2        Updated Self-Reporting Link     Feb 2021       Krysl 669       McCaw 897           Olsen 640 PURPOSE AND POLICY One of the requirements to hold a sworn position in the Fire Department of the City of Omaha is that such employee must possess a valid, current license to operate a motor vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of each individual employee to report to his/her supervisor the loss of driver's license and/or driving privileges as soon as such loss occurs. Failure to promptly report loss of driving privileges can result in the employee’s discipline and/or termination. This applies any time the employee's driving privileges are limited in any way by any court or administrative office. PROCEDURES The City of Omaha recognizes that occasions arise where otherwise valuable employees may temporarily lose their driving privileges. In a desire to help such employees and to protect the City's investment in highly trained personnel, the City is prepared to make certain accommodations when possible. 1. If an employee (probationary or otherwise) loses his/her privilege to operate a motor vehicle for one hundred eighty (180) days or less, and promptly reports the loss to his/her supervisor, the following shall apply: a. The employee will be suspended for up to 3 working days. The Fire Chief shall determine whether any suspension is necessary, and if so, within the previously defined duration. b. The employee shall (during the period in which he/she does not have the privilege of operating a motor vehicle) be reduced in pay to the next lower pay level which is closest to a 10% pay reduction. If the employee is at pay grade 1 U.F., Step A or B he/she shall be required to wait an additional six (6) months for Step increase. In addition, said employee, during the period he/she is without driver's license is subject to being reassigned by the Fire Chief. c. For a period of one year after such loss of driving privileges said employee shall be subject to having his/her leave schedule changed at the discretion of the Fire Chief. d. The employee shall have no right to appeal any of the above actions (a, b, c) pursuant to the Union Contract or any other avenues of appeal.

--- PERS 3-2 ---
2. If an employee loses his/her privilege to operate a motor vehicle for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, up to (1) year, and promptly reports the loss to his/her supervisor, the following shall apply. a. The employee will be suspended for 7 working days. b. The employee shall (during the period in which he/she does not have the privilege of operating a motor vehicle) be reduced in pay to the next lower pay level which is closest to a 10% pay reduction. If the employee is at pay grade 1 U.F., Step A or B he/she shall be required to wait an additional six (6) months for Step increase. In addition, said employee, during the period he/she is without driver's license is subject to being reassigned by the Fire Chief. c. For a period of one year after such loss of driving privileges said employee shall be subject to having his/her leave schedule changed at the discretion of the Fire Chief. d. The employee shall have no right to appeal any of the above actions (a, b, c) pursuant to the Union Contract or any other avenues of appeal. 3. If an employee loses his license for a period of more than one (1) year, said employee shall be subject to termination or the penalty prescribed in number 2 above. If the penalty is termination of employment said employee shall be allowed to appeal said termination pursuant to Union contract or any other avenues of appeal. The above provisions are geared to the actual number of days that the employee is without their valid, operator’s license, and/or driving privileges. Each individual incident for each employee shall be considered separately. LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL MANDATORY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS The State of Nebraska Credentialing Division requires Mandatory Reporting by Health Care Professionals, Facilities, Peer and Professional Organizations and Insurers. Personnel who are convicted of any felony or misdemeanor in this or any other State or Jurisdiction must self-report to the DHHS Division of Public Health, Investigations Unit. This mandatory self-reporting must be completed online within 30 days after court conviction date. Mandatory Licensed Health Professional Reporting can be completed online at: https://phcmplnt-dhhs.ne.gov/SelfComplaint WHAT TO REPORT                                                     WHO IS TO REPORT Practice Without a License.                                        All Professionals Gross Incompetence. Pattern of Negligent Conduct. Unprofessional Conduct.                                            All Professionals report Others of Practice While Impaired by Alcohol/Drugs or Physical, Mental, or   the SAME Profession* Emotional Disability. Violations of Other Regulatory Provisions of the Profession.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                        PERS 3-2 WHAT TO REPORT                                                                WHO IS TO REPORT Gross Incompetence. All Professionals report Others of Practice while Impaired by Alcohol/Drugs or Physical, Mental, or a DIFFERENT Profession* Emotional Disability. Loss or Voluntary Limitation of Privilege.                                    All Professionals Resignation from Staff. Self-Reporting Loss of Employment. Licensure Denial.                                                             Due to Alleged Incompetence, Loss of Membership in Professional Organization/ EMS Service.                 Negligence, Unethical Adverse Action pertaining to Professional Liability Coverage. Loss of Employment or Licensure Discipline/Settlement/Voluntary. Surrender/Limitation in any Unprofessional Conduct, or State or Jurisdiction. Physical, Mental, or Chemical Conviction of Felony or Misdemeanor in this or any other State or Impairment Jurisdiction. EMS Services, Health Facilities, Payments made due to Adverse Judgement, Settlement, or Award. Peer Review Organizations, and Adverse Action affecting privileges or memberships. *** See above Professional Association * Exceptions to reporting are: 1) If you are a spouse of the practitioner, 2) If you are providing treatment which means information is protected by a practitioner-patient relationship (unless a danger to the public), 3) When a chemically impaired professional enters the Licensee Assistance Program, 4) When serving as a committee member or witness for a peer review activity. 5) Convictions that were dismissed by diversion, pardoned, set aside; or expunged. ** Unless knowledge is based on confidential medical records Forms can be found on the website at http://www.hhs.state.ne.us/crl/reportregs.pdf or in the EMS Office. NOTE: Failure to report as specified above may result in sanctioning of an employee’s State EMT License by the State of Nebraska. Failure to report as specified above may result in department discipline. When a fire department employee is cited and/or arrested for any misdemeanor or felony offense, regardless of loss of driver’s license, the employee must keep Fire Administration informed of their disposition throughout their judicial process. Items listed below, must be reported in writing to the Fire Chief, through the chain of command, and the Professional Standards Office as soon as possible.     Any Change in Court Date (if applicable)     After Court Judgment/Decision (Acquittal, Conviction or Dismissal)     Completion of any Court Directives or Diversion Programs     Any Change in Driver’s License Status
PERSONNEL 3-4 CITY OF OMAHA ALCOHOL & DRUG POLICY/PROCEDURES REVISION HISTORY REVISION #     REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED      AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1              Periodic Review          Nov 2015     Ausdemore 600     McEvoy 680        Kanger 601 2              Periodic Review          Mar 2016       Miranda 919    McCormick 638      Kanger 601 Suspected alcohol or drug abuse violations will be handled in the following manner as per the City of Omaha Human Resource Policy #35; “Drugs and Alcohol” Policy. PURPOSE The City of Omaha recognizes its responsibilities toward the maintenance of the physical and emotional well-being of its employees. We recognize that employee drug/alcohol problems are inherent in any work force and that this in turn impacts on the personal life of employees and their families. Since these problems not only affect the employee’s personal life, but can also result in deteriorating job performance, the City believes that it is in the best interest of its employees, their families, and the City to provide the opportunity to deal with these personal problems. There is no intent to intrude upon the private lives of employees. The City recognizes that employees with drug and alcohol abuse problems make up only a fraction of the work force, and the City understands that inconveniences may be caused to the many non-abusers by the problems of the few. It is believed, however, that the benefits to be derived will more than make up for any inconvenience to the majority of the employees. The purpose of this policy is as follows:     to establish and maintain a safe, healthy, working environment for all employees;     to ensure the reputation of City of Omaha employees as good, responsible citizens worthy of public trust;     to reduce the incidents of accidental injury to person or property;     to reduce absenteeism, tardiness and indifferent job performance;     to provide assistance toward rehabilitation for any employee who seeks the City's help in overcoming any addiction to, dependence upon or problem with alcohol or drugs. The City is committed to maintaining a safe, healthful and productive work environment for all employees and to ensure the safe and efficient delivery of services to the citizens of the City of Omaha. To that end, the City will attempt to eliminate the abuse of alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription drugs or any other substance which could impair an employee's ability to perform

--- PERS 3-4 ---
safely and effectively the functions of any given job. All City of Omaha employees are covered by this Policy and should be aware that violation of this policy can result in discipline up to and including discharge. DEFINITIONS Alcohol shall mean any product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, synthetic ethyl alcohol, the four varieties of liquor defined in sub-departments (2) to (5) of section 53-103 Nebraska R.R.S. alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol, flavoring extracts, syrups, or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary, and toilet preparations. Drug shall mean any substance, chemical, or compound as described, defined, or delineated in sections 28-405 and 28-4l9 Nebraska R.R.S. or any metabolite or conjugated form thereof, except that any substance, chemical, or compound containing any product as defined in #1 of this section may also be defined as alcohol. Alcohol or Drug Abuse - for purposes of this policy, alcohol and/or drug abuse shall be defined as an employee's dependence or addiction of sufficient severity to have the effect of impairing the performance of their official duties or their job behavior. Reasonable suspicion is a belief based on objective facts sufficient to lead a reasonably prudent person to suspect that an employee is under the influence of a substance so that the employee's ability to perform the functions of the job is impaired or so that the employee's ability to perform his/her job safely is reduced. Reasonable suspicion may result from actual observation of the use or ingestion of a substance by an employee. It may be based on reliable information that the employee is currently or has recently used or possessed a controlled substance, or open container with alcohol on the job. Reasonable suspicion may result from an observation of physical symptoms such as slurred speech; red, watery eyes; unsteady gait; dilated pupils; and drowsiness or actual sleeping on the job. In addition, reasonable suspicion may result from the observation of behavioral symptoms such as severe mood swings, unexplained personality changes, inattention to personal hygiene, and frequent accidents. EAP - Employee Assistance Program: refer to OFD Standard Operating Procedure PERS 5-0 Impaired. The inability of an employee to perform his/her usual and normal work assignments with normal effectiveness and efficiency.
POLICY Abuse of alcohol and drugs by City employees will not be tolerated. Drugs Employees of the City of Omaha shall not:    Report to work impaired by any drug;    Whether on or off duty, use, manufacture, possess, sell, or provide to another any drug. Use or possession of medically prescribed drugs or medications, which have been legally prescribed to the employee by a person licensed to do so, is not a violation of this policy. However, no prescription medication of any sort shall be brought upon City property by any person other than the person for whom the medication is prescribed and shall be used only in the manner, combination and quantity prescribed. A City employee who is taking any medication, whether prescribed or non-prescribed, which may interfere with the safe and effective performance of duties or operation of City equipment, is required to advise his or her supervisor of that fact, before beginning work. In the event that there is a question regarding an employee's ability to safely and effectively perform assigned duties while using such medication, clearance from a physician shall be required. Failure to advise a supervisor of the use of any medication which may interfere with the safe and effective performance of duties or operation of City equipment may result in discipline. Any employee who is convicted of a violation of any criminal drug statute for an incident occurring in the workplace shall notify the City of the conviction within five (5) calendar days of the conviction. If the City Department in which the convicted employee is assigned receives any grant funding from the federal government, the conviction is to be reported by the City to the granting agency within ten days of receiving notice of the conviction. Alcohol Employees of the City of Omaha shall not:    Report to work impaired by the use of alcohol;    On duty, use, possess, sell, or provide to another alcohol;    While on duty or on call, be impaired by the use of alcohol. "On Call," as above shall mean that situation where an employee has been specifically and personally notified that he/she is on stand-by for a specific period of time (not to exceed 72 hours) and subject to being called in for City work on an emergency basis. Such notification must occur either at the end of an employee's work shift before the employee leaves work or eight (8) hours before any call-in would occur.
For the purposes of this Policy, an employee whose blood, breath or urine, when tested, contains an alcohol concentration of .04 percent or above is presumed deemed to be impaired by the use of alcohol. For the purposes of this policy, an employee whose blood, breath or urine, when tested, contains an alcohol concentration of less than .04 percent may be considered impaired, depending on a consideration of all of the circumstances. EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF EMPLOYEES The City will develop & implement a drug free awareness program to inform its employees of:    The dangers of drug/alcohol abuse in the workplace;    The City's policy regarding drug and alcohol use;    The availability of counseling, rehabilitation, etc. through the City's EAP program.    The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for substance abuse violations. Additionally, educational activities focusing on stress, substance abuse, and other problem areas may also be provided. These activities are designed to promote early identification and self-referral; to prevent problems from developing and/or becoming more severe; and to enhance the quality of life. Employees are encouraged to utilize the EAP programs provided by the City in seeking assistance with drug/alcohol problems. Employees' use of these services privately and on their own initiative will not jeopardize job security, promotional opportunity and/or reputation. When such use is private and voluntary, no report of any kind will be made by the EAP to the City unless the employee freely and willingly chooses. The City will develop and implement a program of training to assist supervisory personnel and the Union in the recognition of conduct and behavior that gives rise to suspicion that an employee may be a drug/alcohol abuser. The intent of this training is not to put the supervisor in a position to diagnose alcohol/drug problems, but simply to make such supervisors sufficiently aware of the causes and symptoms that they may seek proper referral. Such training program shall also inform the supervisors of the City's EAP Program policies and encourage the supervisor to seek proper consultation with other city officials and the EAP when attempting to deal with employee's deteriorating job performance. DRUG/ALCOHOL TESTING PROCEDURES Any time a supervisor has reasonable suspicion to believe an on duty employee is impaired by alcohol or drugs, he/she shall immediately place such employee on special assignment in order to protect the employee, fellow employees, and the public from harm. The supervisor shall immediately notify his/her supervisor of such action and the particular employee's Union representative. Both supervisors and the Union representative, if available, will interview the employee and if both supervisors believe, based upon reasonable suspicion, that the employee is impaired by
the use of alcohol or drugs, then said employee will be ordered, pursuant to this policy, to submit to a test of his/her blood, breath, or urine. In determining whether or not the employee is impaired, the supervisors shall consult with the Labor Relations Director, Human Resources Director, Safety Inspectors, Law Department, or any other appropriate City official, and utilize any reasonable means or procedures available to conform or disprove such suspicion. A supervisor shall transport the employee to that facility designated by the City for the performance of drug or alcohol tests. As soon as practically possible after the administration of such test, each supervisor shall document to the Department Head the reasons and causes which give rise to the reasonable suspicion. Additionally this documentation shall include a narrative of what steps were taken by the supervisor(s). Before a drug or alcohol test is administered, employees will be ordered to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to a designated City official(s). The consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to acknowledge that they have been notified of the City's drug/alcohol testing policy. The consent form for drug tests shall also set forth the following information;    the procedure for confirming an initial positive test result;    the consequences of a confirmed positive test result;    the consequences of refusing to undergo a drug test. The initial drug screening shall be the enzyme immunoassay techniques (EMIT) test which shall be administered at City expense. An employee or job applicant whose drug test indicates the presence of a drug group listed further on in this section shall be given a second test, at City expense, using a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (CG/MS) test. The second test shall use a portion of the same test sample withdrawn from the employee or applicant for use in the first test. If this CG/MS test confirms the drug group presence, both tests will be reviewed by a Medical Review Officer who shall be a properly licensed and trained medical doctor. The purpose of this review is to see if the drug presence can be explained by the individual employee's medical history. In completing this review the Medical Review Officer shall interview the employee and may perform a physical examination on such employee. Refusal to cooperate in such an interview or to consent to such physical examination shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination. If the medical review confirms the presence of drugs in the employee's body fluids then such test shall be considered positive. The employee or applicant shall be notified confidentially in a sealed envelope so marked of the results in writing by the appropriate Department Head or designee using standard form. The letter of notification shall identify the particular substance found.
An employee who tests positive for drugs may, at the employees' own expense, have a third test conducted on the same sample at a laboratory testing. If test is for alcohol and the City orders breath test, employee has the right to another test. That test may be for blood, breath, or urine. If an employee refuses to consent to drug or alcohol testing, such refusal shall be considered grounds for discipline up to and including termination of employment. An employee who refuses shall be immediately and indefinitely suspended with pay pending disciplinary action. The Supervisor shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that such employee does not operate a motor vehicle (i.e. provide transportation for employee to his/her home). Should the employee refuse to cooperate, and attempts to operate a motor vehicle, the Police shall be immediately notified. When an alcohol or drug test is administered, the employee shall continue on special assignment until test results are available. In no event shall such employee be allowed to operate a motor vehicle or any City equipment during this period. Final test results shall be reported directly and immediately to the Department Head or his designee. If the results and the facts of the particular case indicate impairment from alcohol, or are positive for drugs, the employee shall be immediately and indefinitely suspended with pay. The City shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that such employee does not operate a motor vehicle (i.e. provide transportation for employed to his/her home). Should the employee refuse to cooperate, and attempts to operate a motor vehicle, the Police shall be immediately notified. At all stages of this drug/alcohol testing process the employee's right to confidentiality will be respected and maintained as much as reasonably possible. Only those persons with a need to know are to be informed of the test results. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency, or organization is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee. All records relating to the taking of a drug/alcohol test or the order to take a drug/alcohol test shall be deemed confidential unless written authorization has been obtained freely and willingly from the employee or the records become the subject of a Personnel Board or arbitration hearing or judicial proceeding. All records relating to the taking or ordering of a drug/alcohol test shall be kept in a separate file. Each Department Head shall implement procedures to prevent the unauthorized distribution of the results of an order to take such a test. The facility designated by the City will be licensed pursuant to the federal Clinical Laboratories Improvement Act of l967, 42 U.S.C. 263a, or be accredited by the College of American Pathologists. The above does not apply for breath tests. Any breath testing device shall conform to the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health, and the operators of such devices shall be persons who have obtained or been issued a permit to operate such device pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health. The facility designed by the City shall use strict chain of custody procedures which insure proper identification, labeling and handling of test samples. Such samples, except for breath test specimens, which result in a finding of drugs or alcohol shall be refrigerated and preserved in a sufficient quantity for retesting or a period of at least one hundred eight days. Furthermore, such
facility shall in all respects comply with 48-1901 Neb. R.R.S. (l988), and all applicable state and federal statutes, rules and regulations. When drug testing is required under the provisions of this policy, a urinalysis test will be given to detect the presence of the following drug groups: URINE DRUG TESTING COMPONENTS DRUGS            LEVEL Amphetamines       300 ng/mL Barbiturates       300 ng/mL Cannabinoids       50 ng/mL Cocaine Metabolite 300 ng/mL Benzodiazephines   300 ng/mL Methadone          300 ng/mL Methaqualone       300 ng/mL Opiates            300 ng/mL Phencyclidine      75 ng/mL Propoxhene         300 ng/mL Any applicant for any City job may, at the discretion of the City, be required, as part of their pre- employment physical, to undergo drug testing pursuant to Part V of this policy. Any applicant who refuses such testing or tests positive shall have his/her hiring process terminated. Such person will not be allowed to re-apply for any City position for a period of one year. Supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this Policy. Any supervisor who knowingly permits a violation of this Policy shall be subject to disciplinary action. Any non- supervisory employee who believes that any other City employee (supervisor or non-supervisor) is in violation of this Policy may report that belief by contact the City Safety Inspector at the hot line phone number 444-4329. In addition to the above-outlined testing based upon reasonable suspicion and for pre- employment purposes the city will randomly test sworn police officers in the Narcotics Unit pursuant to previous policy. POSITIVE TEST RESULTS An employee who tests positive for drugs, or who is determined based upon the test or circumstances to be impaired by alcohol pursuant to the above procedure may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. Any disciplinary action shall be in conformance with appropriate Labor Agreements, and any due process rights employees have under those Agreements will be adhered to.
Factors to be considered in determining appropriate discipline, which may include termination, include, but are not limited to the following:    The position held by the employee and the resulting danger to the health and safety of the employee or the public by such an employee's use of controlled substances or alcohol.    The impact of an employee's use of controlled substances or alcohol on the employee's ability to perform his or her job in the future.    The employee's past job performance.    The length of employment with the City.    The employee's current job performance.    The extent and nature of past disciplinary actions. A second violation of the City's policy regarding alcohol or controlled substances will generally result in termination.    Whether the employee's conduct is scandalous to the service. Any sworn police officer who tests positive for drugs, pursuant to this policy shall be terminated. When any other employee tests positive for drugs or impaired by alcohol, if the employee is not terminated but is either not disciplined or disciplined in some lesser manner, the employee shall be referred to the City's EAP program for assessment, counseling, treatment and rehabilitation. This shall be a management referral, and as such the employee shall be required to execute the necessary medical releases so that the EAP may communicate to the City whether or not such employee is in compliance with directed treatment. Failure of the employee to comply with such directives shall be considered insubordination and, as such, new and separate grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination. In addition, such employees shall be required, in order to maintain their employment with the City, to submit to random testing for the consumption of alcohol or drugs for a period of time (not to exceed two years) reasonably determined based upon the circumstances of the case. Any employee who tests positive for drugs or is shown to be impaired by alcohol pursuant to this random test shall be terminated.
PERSONNEL 4-0 LEAVE PROVISIONS LITIGATION/JURY DUTY/ ELECTION DUTY REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION          DATE REVISED    AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 2        Clarification of procedures     Feb 2020     Bossman 729     Langlois 888       Olsen 640 3        Clarification of procedures     July 2022    Bernard 892    Bossman 729         Olsen 640 PURPOSE To provide guidelines for City employees who are required by law to appear as witnesses in various types of litigation and who are selected for jury duty and as election officials. WITNESS IN LITIGATION If an employee is required by operation of law (subpoena, or other official document which requires the employee's appearance) to appear as a witness at a hearing, deposition, trial or any other legal proceeding during the employee's regular scheduled work time, such employee shall notify his/her supervisor as soon as possible. Notice to Appear / Notice of Trial Subpoenas for Fire Department personnel (EMS/Fire/FIU related) are received and logged in by the EMS Secretary who in turn forwards the subpoena(s) to the designated employee's Battalion Chief. Supervisors shall see to it that subpoenas are delivered to the named employee only. If there is a conflict or personnel have questions concerning any Fire Department related subpoena, they shall contact the County Attorney's office or the Prosecuting Attorney to discuss possible options concerning the conflict via phone. The EMS Secretary is not part of the subpoena process cannot provide a dismissal. At no time should an employee make the decision to not appear without first working this through the attorney representing the case and notifying their Assistant Chief. If an employee is on duty at the time they are required to testify, they will be allowed time off without loss of pay or time. Any compensation associated with this subpoena shall be turned over to the City (Central Cashier, Room H-10, and Civic Center). The employee is expected to return to work each day after their commitment to the court. If the employee is off duty when testimony occurs, the employee has two options: endorse the check over to the City (Central Cashier, Room H-10, and Civic Center) and be paid overtime OR retain the witness fee with no compensation of time.

--- PERS 4-0 ---
Litigation NOT Involving the City of Omaha A subpoena or other official document is issued to Fire personnel regarding litigation in which the City of Omaha is not involved shall be handled in the following manner:    Subpoenas for Fire Department personnel (EMS/Fire/FIU related) are received and logged in by the EMS Secretary who in turn forwards the subpoena(s) to the designated employee's Battalion Chief. Supervisors shall see to it that subpoenas are delivered to the named employee only.    If there is a schedule conflict or personnel have questions regarding facts concerning any related subpoena, they shall contact the issuing Attorney to discuss possible options regarding a schedule conflict or fact about the case. The Attorney shall be contacted via phone and not email. The EMS Secretary is not part of the subpoena process cannot provide a dismissal. o Reasons to contact an Attorney:  Furlough out of town    Continuances to change the court date    Dismissals to request not to appear    If there is any potential City of Omaha liability (i.e. fire department liability, a city employee involved in a motor vehicle accident, etc.), however small the chance, no statement should be made without first contacting the City Law Department via the EMS Secretary.    If the employee appears on leave time or while off duty, the employee shall retain any witness fees.    If firefighters are subpoenaed or receive a court order, they should have the City Law Department review the documents as soon as possible after receipt, as time for objection is very limited.    If the firefighter has any questions, or feels uncomfortable answering questions, please also contact the City Law Department via the EMS Secretary. STATEMENTS REQUEST Any statement without a subpoena or court order is voluntary. If a firefighter is not served with a valid subpoena or court order, he or she is under no obligation to make a statement to any attorney. If you are unsure, please reach out to City Law via the EMS secretary Firefighters are asked to cooperate with police, other law enforcement, and prosecutors.
JURY DUTY AND ELECTION DUTY If an employee is required by operation of law to serve jury duty or to serve as an election official, the employee may choose to so serve on City time or may be granted leave time (annual, comp, or without pay) for such appearance. If the employee serves on City time, any fee paid for such service shall be turned over to the City; if the employee serves on his/her leave time, such employee shall be allowed to keep any service fee. If an employee is part of a twenty-four hour shift operation, such employee will be granted leave time for any shifts occurring within a day for which jury service is required. In order to be granted leave time, it is not necessary that the jury service hours actually include or overlap the shift hours for which leave time is requested. WORKFORCE PROCEDURES Per City Labor Agreements, City employees who are released from their respective duty shift to serve in any of the above mentioned civic capacities are required to turn over all monies received for such duties to the City Finance Department (Central Cashier, Room H-10, Harney level, Civic Center). Exception: reimbursements for travel expenses can be retained by the employee. WorkForce shall reflect the attendance of all on duty employees at election duty, jury duty, giving court testimony, or answering a subpoena. Court Appearances On-Duty Appearances Court time shall be annotated as Regular pay code with comments regarding the case number and any other pertinent information. Any witness fees received shall be turned over to the City by endorsing the check and turning it in to the Central Cashier (Room H-10, Harney level, Civic Center). Off-Duty Appearances If appearing off duty for litigation involving the City of Omaha and the witness fees have been turned over to the City, the employee shall request to have their supervisor add the actual hours to their time sheet as Court Time 1.5. The WorkForce system will automatically calculate the minimum contractual hours to be paid. In the case where no witness fee check is issued to the employee, a Record of Court Service must be obtained from the Clerk of the Court or the applicable attorney's office and then forwarded to the OmaF Timekeeper. No overtime will be paid without a witness fee check or record of court service. When appearing off duty for litigation not involving the City of Omaha, the employee's time shall not be annotated in Workforce. The employee retains any witness fees received.
Jury and Election Duty Fire Department employees who are summoned to serve shall forward the Court Service Notice or Summons to the OmaF Timekeeper before serving their jury duty. The employee shall also notify their chain of command and keep them updated on their court service. After serving on election duty, jury duty, providing court testimony, or answering a subpoena, employees shall: 1. Provide the OmaF Timekeeper with a Record of Court Service which must be requested from the Clerk of the Court or the applicable attorney's office. This document indicates the time and days of active service and the amount of pay received. Hours reported on WorkForce without this documentation will be coded as leave without pay or annual leave. 2. Any court duty pay received shall be turned over to the City (Central Cashier, Room H-10, Harney Street level, Civic Center). The employee shall obtain a receipt and forward a copy to the OmaF Timekeeper. Return to duty: when an employee serves on a jury and is compensated with court duty pay, the employee is not required to return to fire department duty on that particular day. If the employee is not compensated (ex. Court called off) or the employee is released for the day without serving on a jury, the employee is required to return to duty. The employee is entitled to all monies paid for services rendered on the employee's off duty time. Court Compensation as Taxable Income The IRS (Internal Revenue Service) has determined that money received for jury duty, election duty, and a subpoena is taxable income. Applicable people shall receive a W-2 (tax statement) reflecting any such amounts. In the case where an employee is released from regular duty to serve in the above capacity and turns over his/her jury duty pay, etc. The City Finance Department recommends the following action:    On the W-2 form or on a copy of the receipt the employee received from the Central Cashier, briefly note the city policy, the amount of money you received, and the amount you turned over to the City. PROCEDURES FOR APPEARANCE IN COURT Fire Department members are frequently required to appear in court to give testimony in cases regarding fires, accidents, etc. The following information is intended to enable a Fire Department member to be better prepared in the event that they are called upon to deliver testimony.
Before testifying in any Fire Department court case, it is vital that the witness study all information concerning the incident. Pay strict attention to the location, the date and the time of the day that the incident happened. Use the records to recall just what happened, and in what order. At no time should a member attempt to memorize their testimony. Such tactics would sound rehearsed and could be used as an allegation that the testimony was coached or perjured. When a member is called in an official capacity to testify as a witness, he or she shall wear Class “B” Fire Department uniform as outlined in SOP ADM 8-0 - Fire Department Uniforms. When taking the oath, always use a clear and emphatic "I Do." Hesitancy to do so may be interpreted by the judge or jury as an indication that you may not tell the whole truth. It is customary for attorneys to establish qualifications. They will do this by asking pertinent questions that will lead to your qualification to testify in this matter. "What is your name?", "Who is your employer?", "How long have you worked, at what specific job?", "Do you know the defendant personally?", and "Have you any interest in the case?" These questions serve to implant in the judge or jury that you are a witness with experience and qualified to testify in this court. Your behavior must be one of ease and respect. If it is necessary to address the judge, always use the term, "Your Honor." Never call the defendant by their name, always refer to him as the defendant, and never call the prosecuting attorney, or the attorney for the defense by their first names. Use the "Attorney for the Defense" or the "Prosecuting Attorney." Always present your testimony in all fairness to both sides, never, under any circumstances display any hostility toward the accused. In American law, every person is presumed to be innocent until proven guilty. Testimony from a biased witness is quite likely to be discounted by a judge. Always speak clearly and loudly enough so that you can be heard by all present in the courtroom, but modulate your voice so that it will not be unpleasant to hear. If possible, answer all questions with a positive "Yes" or "No" reply. In some cases, answers are lost to a judge or jury by a witness turning their head. Make sure all your answers are heard and understood. In some cases, an attorney for the defense will attempt to confuse a witness to get them to give wrong answers. This is done to anger the witness so that they will not be in control of their faculties. Regardless of the type of questions asked and any insinuations made, you should always remain calm and hold your temper at all times. It is always to your credit and to the discredit of the attorney relying upon such tactics. Undue interest on the part of a witness has an adverse effect on a judge or jury. Do not appear to be anxious to gain a conviction in the case. The judge is likely to discount any testimony given by a witness showing too great an interest in the case. Remember, all witnesses are sworn to "Tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth," therefore, be extremely careful that all evidence given by you be truthful in every respect.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                 PERS 4-0 Never testify to any occurrence as a fact unless you have personal knowledge of that fact. Second hand information is not admissible in courts of law. If you must answer a question concerning some incident that you did not yourself observe, start your answer by stating that you personally did not hear or see the occurrence. You may use your notes or note book to refresh your memory providing the entries were made at the time of the incident. It is not permissible for a witness to wait until just before the trial to fill in their note book. Discuss this with the prosecuting attorney before the trial. Evidence and exhibits are generally identified by witnesses as having been actually picked up at the scene of the fire. In identifying such evidence, the witness should be in a position to state positively that the exhibit is the one they discovered or was found at the scene. In order that such identification will be possible, a label should have been previously attached to the exhibit and signed by the investigator or witness. Another means that has been used to make positive identification is to scratch a name or number or other identifying mark upon the exhibit and to identify that mark as having been made by the witness at the time of the incident. Also, it is necessary to show that the evidence was safeguarded from the time it was discovered until it was produced in court. Whether during recess of the court, in the hallways, at the scene of the incident, or at any time, it is better not to discuss the case with any unauthorized person. Valuable information may be revealed, which should not properly come out except during the course of the trial. However, you do have a right to discuss a case with your superiors or other persons having a legitimate interest in the case in question. Before any information is to be given, be sure to check with your immediate supervisor. Always use the Chain of Command to receive permission to discuss a court case with anyone; remember, a member does not have to give a statement to anyone unless they have been subpoenaed.
PERSONNEL 4-1 LEAVE PROVISIONS ANNUAL / FUNERAL / MILITARY / IOD / SICK LEAVE REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1              New format             Nov 2015        Miranda 919      McEvoy 680       McCormick 638 2             Military Leave          Aug 2019       Bossman 729       Langlois 888      McCaw 897 3           Retirement Day AL         Nov 2023       Bossman 729      Bossman 729       Bossman 729 PURPOSE The purpose of the following procedure is to clarify language that exists in the Collective Bargaining Agreement. ANNUAL LEAVE It is the responsibility of the employee to keep track of his/her own leave balances and to know how many hours of accrued annual leave is available before utilizing annual time or taking a scheduled furlough. If an employee takes time off in excess of accrued annual hours, these hours will be considered time off without pay. The employee will not be permitted to utilize any other type of leave or compensatory time in order to receive pay for the excess hours. An employee may request through his or her chain of command to utilize Annual Leave or Comp hours for the remaining hours on his or her final shift following a retirement celebration. Requests to use Annual Leave or Comp hours must be submitted to the Assistant Chief by 1300 hours two (2) days prior to the leave day requested. FUNERAL LEAVE Funeral leave must receive authorization by the Chief of the Department or his designee. Personnel requiring funeral leave must contact the on-duty Battalion Chief for their Battalion who in turn will notify the on-duty Assistant Chief to receive authorization for funeral leave. The number of days granted and the conditions are stated in the current union contract. The Fire Chief or designee may, in the exercise of discretion, grant funeral leave in addition to that provided in the contract. If funeral leave is authorized and taken, an OFD1 shall be submitted within 72 hours of the last funeral leave day taken or the employee will be charged off without pay. The funeral leave slip is placed in the employee’s file.

--- PERS 4-1 ---
MILITARY LEAVE All military orders must be submitted to the Fire Chief’s office through the chain of command no less than 72 hours prior to taking planned military leave. Military leave includes both deployment and weekend drills. The after-the-fact submission of military orders shall result in the employee being charged the hours off without pay. Copies of all military orders, current year as well as past years, are filed with OFD Timekeeping. INJURED ON DUTY (IOD)/SICK LEAVE When an employee is injured on duty, it is City policy to charge the employee with IOD leave contingent on approval by the Human Resource Department. This determination shall be promptly made within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date of receipt of the injury report by the Human Resource Department. Should circumstances prevail that an extension of the time period be necessary, this may be permitted by mutual agreement of both the City and the Union. NOTE: For additional related information, see leave provisions in present Union contract. Article 16.
PERSONNEL 4-2 FAMILY & MEDICAL LEAVE ACT (FMLA LEAVE) REVISION HISTORY DATE REVISION #     REVISION DESCRIPTION                         AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY REVISED Family Sick Max & Timekeeping 5                                          July 2021   McCaw 897         Ryan 679          Olsen 640 procedures 6          Checking FMLA Approvals         July 2024   Thorson 1189     Bradley 923      Bossman 729 7        Additional Info & Related SOPs   May 2025     Thorson 1189     Bradley 923      Bossman 729 PURPOSE The Federal Government’s Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 allows eligible employees to take job-protected, unpaid, family medical leave to eligible employees for up to 12 work weeks, 480 hours, per calendar year. POLICY AND PROCEDURE FMLA Leave All employees requesting FMLA leave must provide verbal or written notice of the need for the leave. Employees requesting leave will be provided with the City’s Notice of Eligibility and Rights & Responsibilities form within five (5) business days. When the need for the leave is foreseeable, the employee must provide the City with at least thirty (30) days’ notice. When an employee becomes aware of a need for FMLA leave less than thirty (30) days in advance, the employee must provide notice of the need for the leave either the same day or the next business day. For planned medical treatment, the employee must consult with their supervisor and try to schedule an appointment at a time that minimizes the disruption to the City. The City would generally prefer that planned medical treatment be scheduled for the beginning or the end of the work shift if it must occur during work hours. The employee should consult with his/her supervisor prior to scheduling of treatment to arrange a schedule that best suits the needs of both the employee and employer. When the need for FMLA leave is not foreseeable, the employee must comply with the City’s usual and customary notice and procedural requirements for requesting leave, absent unusual circumstances, as set forth in the relevant City policy, ordinances, or labor agreements. In circumstances where an employee has been absent for three (3) consecutive days due to illness or injury, supervisors must promptly report such absences to the Human Resources Department Benefits Division so that FMLA paperwork may be sent to the employee.

--- PERS 4-2 ---
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                PERS 4-2 Procedure for Requesting FMLA Paperwork FMLA paperwork is requested by sending an email to the Fire Services Personnel Manager (FSPM). The request shall include full name and mailing address of the employee requesting FMLA Leave. It shall also include whether the FMLA is for the employee, an immediate family member, or the birth of a child. The FSPM will forward the request to the contact person in the City of Omaha’s Human Resources Department. Once the request is received, the FMLA Packet will be sent to the employee’s mailing address. It is the employee’s responsibility to fill out his/her portion of the packet and have the physician sign the form. The FMLA Physician Certification Form must be sent back to the Human Resources Department for approval. An employee must have worked for the City for at least twelve (12) months and worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12-month period immediately before the date when the leave is requested to commence. Time spent on paid or unpaid leave, including FMLA leave, is not included as hours worked and not counted in determining the 1,250 hours eligibility test for an employee under FMLA. If you feel you may qualify for FMLA or have any questions or concerns about the process, contact the Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department for guidance and assistance in the application process. For additional information, see Human Resource Policy 14, Family and Medical Leave Act (click on hyperlink then select Policy 14 Family and Medical Leave Act). Timekeeping Procedures for Approved FMLA Paid or unpaid leave shall be used concurrently with approved FMLA leave and as such is subject to the maximum number of allowed hours per the current Collective Bargaining Agreement, City policy, or ordinance. See Human Resource Policy #14 for complete details. For example, an employee approved for FMLA leave to care for their own serious health condition may use their sick leave concurrently with FMLA leave. An employee approved for FMLA leave to care for an immediate family member may choose to use paid leave from their family sick (up to the maximum number of hours allowed), annual, or comp banks. This leave will run concurrently with FMLA leave. FMLA Leave Pay Codes Pay Code                    Leave Bank               To Care For FMLA_Annual                 Annual Leave             Self or immediate family member FMLA_Comp                   Current/Prior Comp       Self or immediate family member FMLA_Family_Sick            Sick Leave*              Immediate family member FMLA_Pregnancy              Sick Leave               Self or spouse Self (HR approval required to use for family FMLA_Sick                   Sick Leave member after all other leave banks are exhausted) FMLA_WOP                    N/A                      Self or immediate family member
*Subject to maximum allowable hours of sick leave to care for an immediate family member per the current CBA. Hours are deducted from Sick Leave bank and are also reflected in your Family Sick Usage – YTD bank in Workforce. If the status of an employee’s FMLA approval is unknown, supervisors should contact the FSPM to confirm before adding an FMLA pay code to an employee’s timesheet. Intermittent FMLA Leave Intermittent FMLA Leave occurs at intervals rather than continuously. The employee must follow the proper sick leave notification process. Failure to properly notify a manager could result in discipline. Employees cannot be disciplined for taking FMLA leave, but can be disciplined for failing to follow the leave notification process. Continuous FMLA Leave Continuous FMLA Leave is leave taken without interruption. The employee should inform the FSPM of the start date and estimated return date of their leave. If concerned about leave coverage, employees may contact City Benefits for assistance to ensure their leave covers their absence and that their benefits remain intact. Returning to Work If an employee has been continuously out on FMLA leave, they must provide a doctor’s release before returning to work. Once received, HR must receive a copy for the employee’s FMLA file. Related SOPs •   PERS 3-6 Paternity Leave Policy •   ADM 3-2-2 Sick Leave Procedures •   PERS 3-5 Pregnancy Policy
PERSONNEL 5-0 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION         DATE REVISED    AUTHOR       REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1            Periodic Revision          Nov 2015     Hunter 723      McEvoy 680        Kanger 601 2        Updates to leave requests      June 2016    Miranda 919     Bernard 892     McCormick 638 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM POLICY STATEMENT It shall be the policy of the Fire Department to encourage all employees to seek assistance for their personal problems, which may or may not be affecting job performance. The Fire Department shall make available to all employees the services of a comprehensive Employee Assistance Program (EAP). Requesting or receiving assistance for personal problems will not jeopardize Job security or promotional opportunities by use of the Employee Assistance Program. EAP PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES Services: Employees are eligible to receive the following services of the EAP Types of Referrals There are three ways employees of the Omaha Fire Department can access EAP services. 1. Self-Referral: Self-referrals are employees who recognize that they have a personal or family problem for which they want professional help. These individuals contact the EAP and set up appointments on their own time. No one in the Fire Department or the City of Omaha Human Resources Department will have any knowledge of this contact. 2. Supervisory Referral: Supervisory referrals are based on job performance problems. When department employees are referred to EAP by their supervisors because of job performance, the EAP is required to let the supervisor know if that employee has kept an appointment with EAP and whether or not they are following EAP's recommendations. Information concerning the nature of the problem or the employee's personal history will not be shared with the department supervisors. 3. Management Referral: Management referrals may be used to refer an employee to the EAP. Failure of the employee to comply with such directives shall be considered insubordination. When department employees are referred to EAP by management, the EAP is required to let management know if that employee has kept an appointment with EAP and whether

--- PERS 5-0 ---
or not they are following EAP's recommendations. Information concerning the nature of the problem or the employee's personal history will not be shared with the department management. Confidential Counseling Services EAP is intended to serve as an effective liaison between the employee and qualified affordable referral sources in the Omaha area. EAP client services include initial assessment, motivational counseling, and referral to an appropriate community resource for continued care, consultation and follow-up as needed. All EAP records of employees seeking assistance will be kept strictly confidential and will not be noted in any official record in the employee's personnel file. Information from EAP records may only be released with the written permission of the employee. EAP services are provided without charge to employees of the Fire Department and their family members. Supervisory Training and Ongoing Consultation When an employee's attendance, performance or conduct is unsatisfactory, it is the supervisor's responsibility to attempt to help the employee correct these problems. Early identification of performance problems and immediate action will enhance the possibility of early resolution. Every employee has problems now and then, but if unusual action or performance change is continuing and repeated, it is the job of the supervisor to intervene. The Employee Assistance Program will provide training to all department supervisors. This training will include assistance in documenting job performance problems, preparing for the corrective interview, referring to the EAP and monitoring job performance after EAP contact. Supervisors may contact the Employee Assistance Program staff at any time to consult about an employee's job performance to determine if a referral is indicated. Responsibility of Administrative/Supervisory Personnel Administrative personnel at every level shall be responsible to promote the availability of the EAP to their employees. It is recognized that administrators do not have the professional qualifications to assess specific problems of the employee. A supervisory referral for assessment will be based on documented unsatisfactory work performance, which cannot be corrected through standard corrective procedures or through the employee's individual efforts. When an employee is given a written reprimand, the administration may inform the employee of the availability of the EAP and recommend a referral to the EAP Responsibility of the Employee The employee has the option to follow through with the supervisor's recommendation to contact EAP and to cooperate with the prescribed counseling or therapy. Employees who refuse assessment and referral services of EAP, or who do not respond to ongoing assistance, will be
handled in accordance with standard administrative and disciplinary policies for unacceptable job performance. Role of the Employee Assistance Program EAP is intended to serve the needs of both the Fire Department and the employee, but will not become a vehicle for communication between the employee and the employer. EAP will notify the referring supervisor of follow through or lack of follow through by the employee to the EAP and to any referral, EAP recommends. Dependents Since employee work performance may be affected adversely by the problems of the spouse or other family members, the EAP also is available to immediate family members of the employee without charge. Leave Employees are encouraged to seek assistance from EAP in a manner, which minimizes the interruption of Fire Department business. Sick leave will be granted to employees for extended treatment or rehabilitation as in any other illness. The Fire Department will not be obligated to pay fees of referral resources beyond EAP except to the extent that employee health plans provide for insurance coverage. EAP—Responsibilities The Project Director's and/or Counselor's responsibility, after referral from the supervisor, or voluntary referral from the employee, is to:     Discuss with the problem employee his or her performance;     Refresh in the employee's mind the nature of the benefits available through the EAP;     Explain that the EAP is completely confidential, that the cause of the problem is not the business of the organization or anyone in it, and that the organization's opinion of him or her will not be diminished because he or she elects to participate in the EAP;     Stress the reasons for referral, that is, the organization does not wish to lose the valuable services of this individual;     Point out that the resource person has worked successfully with many other employees who have had these types of problems;     Emphasize that in the final analysis, it is the employee's responsibility to accept help, correct the problem, and to improve his or her work performance;     Determine what problem is causing the drop in job performance:     Refer employee to the appropriate treatment resource in the community;     Help the employee receive all of the assistance available through the EAP     Maintain continuing follow-up and status of individual cases.
On Duty Emergency Use of EAP If an emergency situation shall arise where a Fire Department member needs the service of the Employee Assistance Program while on duty, the following shall be the Fire Department policy: 1. Employees shall notify their immediate supervisor of the emergency need for EAP usage. 2. The immediate supervisor shall make the decision on whether to release the employee from duty. If the employee is released, the immediate supervisor shall add the anticipated hours of Sick leave to the individual’s WorkForce time sheet according to Department policy as referenced in SOP ADM 10-0. Comments must note that the employee was released on sick leave to the EAP. No reference to the exact cause shall be made. 3. After it is known whether or not the employee will return to his duty shift, the immediate supervisor shall correct the time absent on WorkForce as necessary. 4. In the event there is an intermediate supervisor between the immediate supervisor and the Assistant Chief, this supervisor shall be advised verbally of the situation immediately. The intermediate supervisors shall then verbally advise the appropriate Assistant Chief of the details. The responsibility for confidentiality of verbal details rests with the Command officers who utilize this information exclusively for manpower scheduling adjustments. Request for Assistance The request for help may be made by calling 402-398-5566 to schedule an appointment; this telephone number also has a 24 hour answering service for availability on nights and weekends. All Employee Assistance Program records of the employee or dependents seeking assistants will be kept confidential and will not be included in employee’s personnel file.
PERSONNEL 5-1 PEER SUPPORT PROGRAM CRITICAL INCIDENT STRESS MANAGEMENT REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION         DATE REVISED     AUTHOR       REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY Hunter 723 1               New Format               Nov 2015      Hunter 723      McEvoy 680 2             Definition Update          June 2023    Bernard 892      Bernard 892      Bossman 729 PURPOSE The Omaha Fire Department is committed to safeguarding the mental health and emotional wellbeing of all employees and recognizes that the duties of employees working in the firefighting profession can be emotionally demanding and difficult. It is common fo r employees to experience stress and emotional difficulties as a result of traumatic events they encounter on a regular basis. Emotional problems may negatively impact work performance and family life. Sometimes these problems, if left untreated, can result in a significant danger to the employee, fellow employees, the affected employee’s family, or the general welfare of the community. POLICY It is the policy of the Omaha Fire Department to help employees preempt and resolve emotional difficulties by providing personnel with access to Peer Support Services, and Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM). These programs have proven to be very beneficial throughout the United States, and Omaha Fire Department members should not hesitate to initiate requests for assistance through these programs whenever a need exists. Attendance at a defined CISM Debriefing shall be mandatory for all those who are directly exposed to or who observe a critical incident. However, active participation in the debriefing shall be on a voluntary basis. DEFINITIONS: Critical Incident: Any event that causes an employee to experience a strong emotional reaction which has the potential to interfere with the individual’s ability to function either at the scene or later. The event does not have to be large in scope, but can be a simple event that has a significant personal effect on the employee. Critical Incident Stress Debriefing: A confidential meeting either in a group or individual setting between employees of the Omaha Fire Department or members of the Nebraska CISM Team.

--- PERS 5-1 ---
Peer Support Team (PST): A group composed of trained employees and a mental health clinician focused on providing assistance to employees during and after a critical incident. Peer Support Team Coordinator (PSTC): An Assistant Fire Chief who coordinates any training, formal meetings, and other functions of the Peer Support Team. Peer Support Team Leader (PSTL): A Peer Support Person, appointed by the PSTC, who works directly with the PST members, supervisors, and others to coordinate the response of the Peer Support Team. Peer Support Person (PSP): A member of the Department trained in accordance with the standards set forth by the City of Omaha, and recognized as a trained and authorized PSP by the Omaha Fire Department. (Current list of PSP is maintained at Local 385 website for ease of access.) Peer Support Meeting: A private discussion between a PSP and an employee, family member, or significant other involving a stressful situation or other organizational stress related to day-to-day activities. Peer Team Debriefing/Defusing: A closed confidential meeting where persons involved in the same critical incident have an opportunity to express their feelings regarding the incident and obtain information about appropriate stress management tools. This is not an operational debriefing, but focuses on an individual’s feelings. Mental Health Coordinator: A Board Certified psychologist or licensed clinical social worker contracted by the City of Omaha to assist in debriefings, assist with the development of training, and provide guidance to the PST and Fire Department as it relates to the mental PROCEDURE: I.    Confidentiality This program is not intended to provide employees who may have violated the law or other serious moral/ethical standard with a method of relieving themselves of real or perceived guilt, nor is it to be construed that a penitent/confessor relationship exists. A. The PST shall maintain strict confidentiality in matters discussed in peer debriefings, defusing or peer support meetings. Any statement or discussion with a PSP while acting in his/her peer support role shall remain confidential except as stated in Section B. B. Mandatory Reporting: 1. The PSP will inform the employee prior to any meeting that the PSP is required t o report to the Fire Chief any law violations, where there is a concern the employee presents a danger to themselves or others, e.g., threats of suicide, homicide or
felonious assault, or any other offenses that Nebraska State Statute and/or City policy requires Department employees to report including suspected sexual assault, sexual harassment, domestic violence, or child/vulnerable adult abuse. 2. Periodically a PSP may need to consult with the mental health clinician for further direction as established by the peer support guidelines. The PSP would provide the mental health clinician with the employee’s information at that time. Examples include: a. ideations of suicide, homicide, or felonious assault. b. significant chemical dependency issues. c. significant mental health issues that are beyond the scope of a peer support program. C. PSPs may discuss general information with another member of the peer support team for input and suggestions. However, the employee’s name will not be mentioned during those discussions, and efforts will be made to maintain the employee’s privacy. D. Any member of the department who has knowledge of a breach of confidentiality can contact the Peer Support Team Coordinator (PSTC). The PSTC will initiate an investigation and, if found true, the party will be dismissed from the position and may result in disciplinary action. E. Any violation of confidentiality can result in discipline and the removal of the PSP from the Peer Support Team. II. Types of Referrals A. Fire personnel involved in an incident where there is either a loss of life or serious life threatening injury. 1. The incident commander will notify FC-2 and the Peer Support Team Leader (PSTL) once the immediate safety needs have been met. 2. The PSTL will determine how many Peer Support Persons (PSP’s) will be needed to respond based upon: a. The nature of the incident. b. The number of involved employees. 3. The PSP will report to the location determined and notify the incident commander, or company officer of their arrival. If there are any questions, the PSP will contact the PSTL.
B. Critical Incident involving mass casualties 1. The incident commander will notify FC-2 and the PSTL once the immediate safety needs have been met. 2. The PSTL will determine how many PSPS will be needed to respond based upon: a. The nature of the incident. b. The number of involved employees. 3. The PSP will report to the incident commander. If there are any questions, the PSP will contact the PSTL. 4. A PSP will ask the affected employee if they would like a PSP to meet with their family or significant other to discuss general information about what to expect, signs and symptoms of post-traumatic stress and a list resources to contact should they need assistance. C. Supervisory Referral 1. The supervisors of any employee involved in a stressful incident are responsible for notifying the PSTL or any PSP on duty of the incident as soon as possible, and for giving information about the situation and which employees were involved. 2. Supervisors must be cognizant that each employee may be affected by events differently and what is overly stressful to one employee may not be to others. Because of this, they should remain alert to possible after-effects of involvement in a stressful event. D. Self-Referral 1. An employee may contact a PSP on their own; preferably a PSP working on the same shift. (This information is currently available on the Local 385 website) 2. The PSP must contact the PSTL as soon as possible if there is a need to meet during off-duty hours. 3. The PSP should contact their direct supervisor for approval to meet on duty. The direct supervisor will consider current job duties and staffing prior to approval. E. Critical Incident Stress Debriefing 1. If the incident is large in scope and involves multiple units and employees, a formal CISD may be implemented.
2. The PSTC or PSTL will take the steps to initiate the Nebraska CISM program. F. After any traumatic event where there was an initial referral, the PSP, will conduct a follow- up contact with the affected employees within thirty (30) days and, if appropriate, again six (6) months after the initial incident or referral. G. Periodically it is beneficial for employees and units to have other employees/units cover their shifts on a temporary basis. The peer support team may coordinate the swapping of shifts or coverage for crews on a voluntary basis and will seek volunteers. III. Selection The Peer Support Program will select employees based upon the following criteria: A. Expressed personal interest in performing PSP duties B. Education/training C. Command recommendations and good performance in the past 2 years D. The Fire Chief will make the final selection based upon the recommendations of the PST and mental health coordinator. IV. De-selection PSPs will be removed from the PST for the following reasons: A. Any conduct inconsistent with the program directives to include but not limited to: 1. Breach of confidentiality. 2. Sexual conduct or personal relationships between the PSP and the person being assisted during the time the assistance is being provided. 3. Failure to remain in good standing with the department. 4. Failure to participate in training sessions and call-outs as established by the PST Coordinator. B. A PSP may voluntarily withdraw from participation in the program at any time with immediate notification to the PST Coordinator. V. Chaplain Program The OFD Chaplains are an invaluable resource and they are a part of the PST and CISM programs, and they should be considered whenever possible. (See SOP PER 6-0)
A. The PST Coordinator may utilize the OFD Chaplains whenever appropriate. Some events where the Chaplains might be used are: 1. Employee’s death or life-threatening injury, especially in the line of duty. 2. Mass casualty. 3. As requested by the affected employee. VI. Mutual Aid The Peer Support Team may coordinate with other nearby Fire and Law Enforcement agencies to provide mutual aid for significant events. All mutual aid agreements will be at the direction of the Fire Chief and will be coordinated by the PST Coordinator. NOTE: Fire Department personnel should remember that the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) is available to all employees and their families. For information on the EAP refer to PERSONNEL 5-0
PERSONNEL 8-0 HARASSMENT PREVENTION POLICY REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED        AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY N/A              New SOP                May 2020       McCormick 638    City HR & Law        Olsen 640 PURPOSE To define and establish the Harassment Prevention Policy for the Omaha Fire Department (OFD) as it relates to Executive Order #S-33-16 ‘Prohibition against unlawful discrimination based on race, color, creed, ethnicity, religion, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, age or disability’, Executive Order #S-39-18 ‘Sexual Harassment Policy’, Human Resources Policy #30 ‘Workplace Violence Prevention & Response’ and Article 6, Section 1 of the labor agreement between the City of Omaha and the Professional Firefighters Association of Omaha, Local No. 385 (“CBA”). BACKGROUND The Omaha Fire Department strives to create and maintain a work environment in which people are treated with dignity, decency and respect. The environment of the OFD should be characterized by mutual trust and absence of intimidation, oppression and exploitation. Employees should be able to work and learn in a safe atmosphere. The accomplishment of this goal is essential to the mission of the OFD. For that reason, OFD will not tolerate unlawful discrimination or harassment of any kind. Through enforcement of this policy and by education of employees, OFD will seek to prevent, correct, and when necessary discipline for, behavior that violates this policy. All employees of OFD, regardless of their rank or position, are covered by and expected to comply with this policy and take appropriate measures to ensure that prohibited conduct does not occur. Appropriate disciplinary action will be taken against any employee who violates this policy. Based on the seriousness of the offense, disciplinary action may be taken, up to and including termination. DEFINITIONS Sexual Harassment: For purposes of this policy, the definition of “Sexual Harassment” In Mayoral Executive Order #S-39-18 will apply. Unlawful Discrimination: For purposes of this policy, the definition of “Unlawful Discrimination” in Mayor Executive Order #S-33-16 (Section A) will apply.

--- PERS 8-0 ---
Harassment: An offensive or hostile working environment created through inappropriate statements or actions, or treatment that is differential in its base and not in accordance with standard accepted policy or practice Hazing: An activity or situation created specifically to shame, harass, ridicule, or cause embarrassment to a specific person or group of persons. POLICY It is the policy of the Omaha Fire Department (OFD) to follow all procedures detailed in the Mayor’s Executive Order #S-33-16, “Prohibition Against Unlawful Discrimination Based Upon Race, Color, Creed Ethnicity, Religion, Sex, Marital Status. Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity National Origin, Age, or Disability” and Mayor’s Executive Order #S-39-18 “Sexual Harassment Policy’, and Human Resource Policy #30 ‘Workplace Violence Prevention and Response,’ and the CBA Nothing in this policy is intended to preclude any OFD employee from reporting unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment, workplace violence, or hazing directly to the Fire Chief, or directly to the Mayor in the event the complaint involves the Fire Chief, as contemplated by the Mayor’s Executive Orders. All employees shall work in an atmosphere free from discrimination and any type of harassment. Discrimination and harassment are not only illegal, but they create a negative atmosphere that reduces work productivity, morale, undermines the integrity of the work place, and destroys professionalism. It is the responsibility of all supervisors to assure that a harassment free and non-discriminatory work environment exists within OFD. OFD will not tolerate the hazing of members. This includes any intentional or reckless act that endangers the mental or physical health or safety of a person as well as any activity that intimidates or threatens a person with ostracism or subjects them to mental stress, shame or humiliation, regardless of content or context. OFD acknowledges the tradition associated with training firefighter candidates, yet when hazing interferes with a candidate’s ability to effectively learn, or crosses the line to the point of becoming harassment, the behavior will not be tolerated. OFD will not tolerate harassment of any type, including but not limited to harassment, which targets the following: gender or gender expression, race, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, skin color, veteran status, HIV or other medical conditions, disabilities, age and or relative position/rank within the fire service (e.g., probationary fire candidates or junior firefighters). PROCEDURE As leaders in public safety, it is expected that all OFD employees will immediately intervene to stop offenders from engaging in harassing behavior and shall provide assistance to individuals who are victims of harassment. If the harassing behavior continues, any employee who witnesses or becomes aware of the harassing behavior has a duty to report said behavior following the process described below. This does not prohibit an employee from reporting