OFD BATTALION CHIEF EXAM — DETAILED STUDY NOTES
SPECIAL OPERATIONS SOPS
============================================================


--- SP OPS 1-0 ---
Response Team Agency Members The Omaha Fire Department has two Hazardous Material Emergency Response Units with specialty trained personnel that respond with proper equipment to handle emergency incidents involving hazardous materials and Technical Rescue incidents. The specialized unit designated Rescue 33 is quartered at Station No. 33, 3232 S. 42nd Street. Engine 33, quartered at Station No. 33, serves as the back-up unit to R-33. The specialized unit designated Rescue 60 is quartered at Station No. 60, 2929 S. 129 th Avenue. R-60 responds as the Technical Rescue Unit with personnel from Station 60. Engine 23, quartered at Station No. 23, 9090 N 30th St. serves as back-up and responds with a specialty trailer. The following agencies may be requested for response to a declared hazardous material incident and for using their collective technical skills and specialized available equi pment to bring hazardous material incidents to a successful conclusion:    Omaha Police Division    Emergency Medical Service    Omaha Public Works    Douglas County Health    The Poison Center    Omaha Public Power District    Metropolitan Utilities District    Douglas County Civil Defense    National Guard 72nd CST Team    Omaha Medical Reserve (OMMRS) The response process may be initiated from several sources, dependent upon the original observer. It is expected that most incidents will be processed through the 911 emergency system. In some cases the notification may be made directly to a City/County agency. In this instance the receiving agency is responsible to notify 911. Response by the OFD HAZMAT team outside the jurisdiction of the City of Omaha will only be made in accordance with existing mutual aid agreements and only upon authorization of the Chief of the Fire Department, or the on duty Assistant Chief. Incident Occurrence Hazardous materials are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 49. A hazardous material incident is an occurrence where a hazardous material is released into the environment or its container is damaged to the extent that the contents can be expected to be released with a resulting potential to cause injury to people or harm to the environment.
For the purpose of this guide, a hazardous material is defined as any substance or material in a quantity or form which may be harmful or injurious to humans, domestic animals, wildlife, economic crops or property when released into the environment. Hazardous materials can be broken down into the following classes as defined by the Emergency Response Guidebook:    Class 1 - Explosives    Class 2 - Gases – Flammable, Non-Flammable, Toxic, and Non-Toxic    Class 3 - Flammable Liquids (And Combustible Liquids [U.S.])    Class 4 - Flammable Solids; Spontaneously Combustible Materials; Dangerous When Wet Materials/ Water- Reactive Substances.    Class 5 - Oxidizing Substances and Organic Peroxides.    Class 6 - Toxic (Poisons or poisonous) Substances and Infectious Substances.    Class 7 - Radioactive Materials.    Class 8 - Corrosive Substances.    Class 9 - Miscellaneous hazardous materials / Products, Substances or Organisms Reporting When a hazardous materials incident is reported to 911 Communication Center. The receiving operator should attempt to obtain the following information in as much detail as possible:    Identification of the caller and callback number.    Exact location of the incident.    Basic description of what occurred.    Identification of the vehicle, building, or object involved.    Approximate time of incident occurrence.    Identification of product if possible (chemical name, product name or DOT designation). An immediate effort will be made by 911 operators to secure current weathe r information for immediate relay to responding units. Weather information obtained will include:    Wind direction (direction it is coming from)    Temperature    Humidity 911 will maintain periodic contact with the weather bureau to allow for constant updating of weather conditions. Unit Dispatch
Unit(s) dispatched to a reported hazardous materials emergency will depend upon the reported, or determined, level of the incident. This determination can be made by the 911 operator based on information received and guidelines set forth in this plan or by first responders if the initial dispatch was not identified as a hazardous material incident. Level I Incident Response    Units dispatched to a Level I incident will consist of a Still Alarm Assignment which may include one (1) engine, one (1) engine and R33 and / or R60, or a Battalion Chief, one (1) engine company, one (1) truck company, and R33 and / or R60. A medic unit shall be dispatched if circumstances warrant.    911 will dispatch required police units necessary for access control.    Receiving hospital will be alerted if the nature of the incident warrants such action. Level II and III Incident Response    For Level II and Ill incidents involving hazardous materials, 911 will dispatch a Fire Two / First Alarm assignment, including Rescue 33, Rescue 60, E23, E33, and an additional Truck (Fire Two)    A medic unit shall be dispatched any time Rescue 33 or Rescue 60 is dispatched to a Level II or III incident.    The Omaha Fire Department Mobile Command Post may be dispatched to Level II and Ill incident at the discretion of the Incident Commander. On-Scene Evaluation Prior to the arrival of the dispatched Battalion Chief, the Captain of the first responding unit on the scene will establish command, verify 911-dispatcher information and transmit a brief initial situation report. The description of the incident will include:    Type of container    Product identification    Injuries    Amount of product released The responding Battalion Chief will assume command upon arrival and will be briefed on the incident situation by on-scene personnel. The Incident Commander will transmit a status update and may make requests for additional assistance if necessary. To protect personnel from a fire hazard that potentially could occur, engine companies shall man a charged 1 3/4'' hose line at incidents where fuel is leaking from a vehicle or container, and/or prior to fuel off-loading procedures that may be deployed by R33 / R60. The Incident Commander will determine, based on existing data, the level of the incident.
If a Level II or III incident is declared, R33 and R60 will be dispatched to the incident scene. The on-scene Incident Commander will begin operations in accordance with Hazardous Materials standard operating procedures and determine the most suitable location for the Department Command Post and Equipment and personnel staging. These locations will be transmitted to 911 for dissemination to all affected agencies. Incident Levels Exclusion Zones Level I This is an incident within the operational capabilities of the first responders. A Level I incident is defined as a release of less than five (5) gallons of liquid or less than 20 pounds of a solid which is a known hazardous material. At a minimum, a hot zone and an informal Command Post will be established at a designated Level I incident. Level II A Level II incident is a major incident that poses many additional problems for the first responders and will likely require the assistance of other city and county agencies. A Level II incident is defined as the release of a known hazardous material of five (5) or more gallons of liquid or 20 or more pounds of a solid, the release of any quantity of a known solid or liquid toxic material in a critical public area, or the release of any quantity of a unknown solid or liquid or gaseous toxic material. A Level II incident requires the establishment of a formal Command Post and the designation of a staging area. Incident zones (hot-warm-cold) will be established and maintained. Localized evacuation may be required. Outside agencies may need to be notified. Level III A Level Ill incident will be considered a local disaster. The hazardous material incident is of such proportion that it is beyond the capabilities of local resources to successfully resolve the incident. This level of incident may last for several days and require large-scale evacuation. Agencies required at this type of incident could include product manufacturers, Red Cross, Salvation Army, Coast Guard, Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Emergency Management Agency and Nebraska Civil Defense. Nebraska National Guard, and many other state, county, and city departments. Exclusion Zone Definitions Hot Zone: The area of maximum hazard. Area restricted to essential personnel wearing proper protective clothing and having an assigned specific activity. Warm Zone: Surrounds the hot zone and is also a restricted area. The level of personal protection required is less than that of the hot zone. No unauthorized personnel are allowed in either the hot or warm zone. Relief, support, and security personnel work within the warm zone. Entrance is restricted to one location.
Cold Zone: The unrestricted area beyond the outer perimeter of the warm zone. To the extent possible, the perimeters of these zones will be identified by banters of banner tape or other methods that will ensure on-site personnel are aware of areas of movement limitations without proper protective clothing and specific assignments. Special Equipment Request Requests for additional equipment or expertise will be made as soon as practical based on existing conditions, by the on-scene Incident Commander. The request for additional assistance is a judgement decision by the on-scene Incident Commander. Additional assistance is not limited to what has been identified in this plan. If assistance is requested at Level I incidents with an informal command post, the requesting officer must give the responding assistance a specific location at the scene to report to. Command Post All declared levels of hazardous materials incidents require the establishment of an incident command post (ICP). The purpose of the ICP is to provide a unified command of all participating agencies to ensure coordinated operations, simplification of communications, performance of logistical tasks, and to assist the Incident Commander with the overall management of incident activities. The ICP will be the location from which all incident operations are directed. The ICP will be located in the Cold Zone and upwind from the incident. The chosen location should also be in a position that allows maximum overall scene viewing. The location of the ICP must be communicated to 911 for dissemination to all concerned agencies. Further, site location must be accessible to responding personnel. Once established, the ICP must be identified by appropriate signs, flags, or some other recognizable symbol. Within the jurisdictional limits of the Omaha Fire Department, as provided by law and ordinances, the Fire Department’s responsibilities at a declared hazardous material incident will be as follows:    Establish a command post, determine and physically mark incident control zones, and assume command of all activities within the established perimeters.    Coordinate the activities of any and all support agencies working within established perimeters.    Assist all support agencies in any way possible.
   Provide a Safety Officer Trained to the highest level required of the incident or appoint an Assistant Safety Officer to meet this requirement.    Provide a Public Information Officer in coordination with Omaha Police.    Provide specialized equipment, materials, and trained personnel to aid in the successful mitigation of the incident.    Develop an appropriate organization to supervise and assist Omaha Fire, EMS, Logistics, Operations, and Planning.    Coordinate and/or provide assignment of outside fire departments responding through mutual aid.    Maintain chronological records of all activities pertinent to the incident, including initial assessment of the incident, update of progress, responses of various agencies and additional equipment, weather conditions and changes, as well as any other information required for a final incident report and later incident critique.    Utilization of the Hazardous Materials Site Safety Plan. Documents contained within the Site Safety Plan are kept on R33 and R60. The Omaha Fire Department will dispatch a medic unit on a special duty assignment on all Level II and Level III incidents that the hazardous materials unit responds to or on special request of the Incident Commander. Responsibilities of the EMS Bureau at a hazardous materials incident will vary depending upon the circumstances at the incident upon their arrival. For a more detailed description of the EMS function at a hazardous materials incident, see Public Information Officer The Public Information Officer (PlO) will be designated by the Incident Commander (IC) and will function as part of the incident command post. This individual will be a member of the Omaha Fire Department’s Fire Prevention Division and will serve as the media contact for all matters pertaining to the incident. The duties of the PlO include:    Obtaining of situation briefing from the IC.    The setting up of an area or location remote from the incident designated only for news media and controlling their activity to this area.    Arrangement of public information meetings at the designated location to brief the media of incident status with as accurate information as possible    Assemble and prepare information for release on a timely basis. Provide for timely updates.    Arrange for media interviews with specific response personnel.
In the event evacuation is necessary, the exact areas to be evacuated will be provided to all media representatives for immediate dissemination. Motor Vehicle Accident Clean-Ups To follow the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) regulations, the Omaha Fire Department’s response to hydrocarbons and anti-freeze spills resulting from vehicle accidents shall be absorbed with ash and placed into a hazardous waste disposal bu cket. All engine companies have a hazardous waste disposal bucket. Hydrocarbons include gas, diesel, oil, transmission fluid and power steering fluid. For incidents requiring less than 50 pounds of ash, the engine companies will absorb all spilled products with ash. When there is no free liquid, the ash will be picked up and placed into a hazardous material 5 gallon bucket. The bucket will be sealed and placed in a compartment that is separate from the cab of the apparatus. The hazardous waste placed in the buckets will be limited to the normal hydrocarbons and anti-freeze encountered at motor vehicle accidents. R33 or R60 shall be requested for any unknown substances or any spill requiring more than 50 pounds of ash. The waste ash will be transported to one of the following sites:    26th and Lake    52nd and Dayton    87th & Vernon    96th & J    20567 Park Road The bucket will be emptied into a designated barrel and the barrel resealed by the engine company. If there is a possibility of an unknown product mixed with the hydrocarbons or anti-freeze, R33 or R60 shall be requested to assist with the identification of the unknown substance. The engine company captain will be responsible for documenting the cleanup on the OFD 283 when R33 or R60 do not respond. When completing the OFD 283, each company's time on scene will be reported in minutes in the space provided. Along with the times, all equipment and material must be reported on the OFD 283. Private Industry Environmental Clean-Up Contractors A current listing of contractors with their phone numbers is kept on Rescue 33 and Rescue 60. Overview The intent of this section is to have a standardized policy for temporary storage of Hazardous Materials Waste. R33 and R60 personnel when responding to scenes where
hazardous waste is on scene and must be mitigated as to remove the hazard from the environment have used the available storage areas in the past. Background Currently, there are barrels marked for Hazardous Materials Waste Storage at various locations / stations throughout the city. For diesel / other hydrocarbons with oil dry or absorbents (solids), these barrels will be used. Examples When R33 or R60 responds to a scene and performs off-loading procedures, at times they must fill 1-4 five (5) gallon cans and transport the cans and dispose of the gas or diesel into the appropriate barrel. This scenario occurs when there is no other way of disposing while on scene (i.e. when the responsible party has no family/friend/co-worker present to off load into another vehicle or when there is no responsible party present at the scene). Also, when R33 or R60 uses small to moderate amounts of absorbents such as pads, snakes, or oil dry (ash, etc.) at scenes they may transport these items back in HAZMAT bags regardless if they have a responsible party or not. When other non-hydrocarbon hazardous material scenarios exist R33 / R60 personnel may use discretion as to transporting the material (usually in small to moderate amounts). Attempts to identify the substance using the HAZMAT ID system or other means available to R33 / R60 shall be made. The substance shall then be bagged and sealed properly (use yellow over pack drum if necessary) before storage is complete. Policy R33 / R60 personnel may transport hydrocarbons for temporary storage. Guidelines for this are the following:      20 gallons or less of gasoline or diesel      5 bags (Yellow HAZMAT bags) or less of solid hydrocarbons If R33 / R60 has a responsible party for these types of incidents then the responsible party shall be liable of all the costs incurred. An OFD 283 form shall be filled out for billing purposes anytime a responsible party is identified. Completed OFD 283 forms shall be sent electronically to “Omaf HAZMAT Billing” mailbox. When to call a private contractor:      When there is a responsible party and there is more hazardous material than the above amounts.      When there is no responsible party and there is more hazardous material than the above amounts.
   When there is a responsible party and an ‘other’ hazardous material, no matter the size or amount, which cannot be safely mitigated and disposed of at the scene.    When there is not a responsible party and an ‘other’ hazardous material, no matter the size or amount, which can’t be safely mitigated and disposed of at the scene.    The R33 / R60 Captain may use his/her discretion as to transporting an ‘other’ hazardous material. If this occurs a clean-up contractor shall be requested to remove the substance. The Special Operations Coordinator shall be notified as soon as possible with the incident # and a description of the events. If a responsible party is present the R33 / R60 Captain shall have the responsible party contact the private contractor while on scene. R33 / R60 shall remain on scene until the private contractor arrives on scene and the incident has been transferred to the private contractor. The contact list of private contractors shall be maintained and updated on a continual basis. Anytime a private contractor is called to the scene R33 / R60 shall email the Special Operations Coordinator with the incident # and a description of the events. Evacuation Facilities Resource Agencies Red Cross In the event of a hazardous materials incident that requires the evacuation of area citizens, the Heartland Chapter of the American Red Cross has the necessary disaster organization to provide temporary shelters. These shelters include:    A safe and healthful facility reasonably close to the victim’s home.    Suitable space for sleeping and an infirmary.    An adequate supply of drinking water, toilet and bathing facilities.    Provisions for cooking, serving, and storing food. The Red Cross disaster evacuation plan can be activated through 911. Salvation Army The Omaha Salvation Army has the capabilities to provide on-site canteen services for emergency response personnel at the scene of a hazardous materials incident. This service can be activated through the 911 Operator, or contacting: Joel Arthur, Cell: 402-510-4403 or Peter Hoskin, Cell: 402-680-1859 The following agencies are capable of providing transportation to expedite movement of personnel in the event of a hazardous materials incident.
Omaha Metro Bus Can be contacted at 402-348-0118 for HAZMAT incidents or simulation drills. National Guard 72nd CST A request must be made to the Governor of Nebraska through the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency (NEMA). This local request must go from the Incident Commander to the Douglas County Emergency Management Agency (DCEMA). DCEMA can be contacted at: Whitney Shipley 402-444-5202, Cell 402-618-0349 direct office line 402-504-6842 or Shannon McVaney 402-444-5203, Cell 402-290-4344.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 1-1 RESPONSE TO NATURAL GAS EMERGENCIES REVISION HISTORY REVISION #     REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY NA                   New                Sept 2018      Langlois 888    McCaw 897         Olsen 640 1         Communications with MUD      Feb 2019       Langlois 888    Salcedo 816       Olsen 640 PURPOSE To outline the OFD’s procedures to respond to natural gas emergencies. PROCEDURE Natural Gas Properties     Odorless gas, with an odorant (Mercaptan) added     Natural gas is lighter than air     Flammable range is 5% (LEL) to 15% (UEL) Initial Actions for all Gas Responses     Determine if MUD has been notified, and if not request them while you are enroute.     Approach with caution from upwind if possible     Do not park in front of building or over manhole or storm drain     Arrive and complete a size-up and risk assessment.     Isolate and deny entry to the area.     Establish staging area to receive incoming resources. Communications with MUD Anytime both OFD and MUD are sent to a report of a gas emergency, Dispatch will give the OFD units responding either channel C3 (DC Common Event 3) or C4 (DC Common Event 4). The DC Common Event Channel will be given to the responding MUD crews so that OFD and MUD will have direct radio communications while enroute and on scene. MUD also has access to channels C5 through C9 (Metro 1 through Metro 5) as well, if necessary. Gas Filled Structure Response     If natural gas is present below 10% LEL or no gas is found, continue with investigation.     If gas odor or any measurable amount of natural gas is detected, do NOT operate doorbell, phone, switches, radios, appliances or anything that could be an ignition source.

--- SP OPS 1-1 ---
o Thermostats are also a potential ignition source, or can power up an ignition source (HVAC components). Contact OPPD and have them secure power.    If there is a strong odor of gas and/or reading of 10% LEL or greater, direct all occupants to evacuate, RETREAT IMMEDIATELY, AND CONSIDER THE AREA HAZARDOUS. o Retreat 330 ft. (Hot Zone), approximately four (4) houses depending on neighborhood. Another point of reference is hydrants which are 300ft apart. o Request MUD to expedite, and give information. Direct communications with the MUD Agency Representative (AREP) enroute should be available on the assigned Metro Channel. o Evacuate surrounding structures, and deny access to area.    Await arrival of MUD AREP that has been assigned to your particular incident. Make contact and report the following: o Gas readings and current situation o Current status, available resources and enroute resources. o Evacuations needed and completed, and hot zone established. Odor or Outside Gas Release Response    Consider that gas could be migrating through soil, underground sewer, and drainage/electrical/plumbing conduits into nearby buildings.    Identify buildings toward which gas underground may be traveling.    Investigate buildings o Question occupants regarding smell of gas and conduct air monitoring ASAP when available. If gas is detected, follow gas filled structure procedures. Natural Gas Leak with Fire (Gas Fed Fire) Response    Protect exposures    Do not extinguish gas fed fire until gas supply can be shut off    Check surrounding buildings for migration of gas and determine if the burning gas is your only concern.
Natural Gas Conversion Chart PPM-LEL-Volume in Air PPM                    LEL                 Volume 500                    1%                   0.05% 1000                    2%                   0.10% 1500                    3%                   0.15% 2000                    4%                   0.20% 2500                    5%                   0.25% 3000                    6%                   0.30% 3500                    7%                   0.35% 4000                    8%                   0.40% 4500                    9%                   0.45% 5000                   10%                   0.50%           Evacuation 10000                  20%                     1% 15000                  30%                   1.50% 20000                  40%                     2% 25000                  50%                   2.50% 30000                  60%                     3% 35000                  70%                   3.50% 40000                  80%                     4% 45000                  90%                   4.50% 50000                  100%                    5%            Explosive Range 55000                  110%                  5.50% 60000                  120%                    6% 65000                  130%                  6.50% 70000                  140%                    7% 75000                  150%                  7.50% 80000                  160%                    8% 85000                  170%                  8.50% 90000                  180%                    9% 95000                  190%                  9.50% 100000                  200%                   10% 105000                  210%                 10.50% 110000                  220%                   11% 115000                  230%                 11.50% 120000                  240%                   12% 125000                  250%                 12.50% 130000                  260%                   13% 135000                  270%                 13.50% 140000                  280%                   14% 145000                  290%                 14.50% 150000                  300%                   15%

--- SP OPS 2-0 ---
SP OPS 2-0 RADIOLOGICAL INCIDENT RESPONSE REVISION HISTORY REVISION                                  DATE REVISION DESCRIPTION                          AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY #                                     REVISED 1            Periodic Revision        NOV 2015      Richardson 860     Olson 1021         Olsen 640 PURPOSE A radiological incident involving the fire service may be described as a situation in which the normal control over radioactive materials is lost, and as a result, there is an actual potential hazard to the health, safety, and property of the general public. Radiological incidents may involve nuclear weapons, fire and/or explosions in buildings or facilities where radioactive materials are used or stored, or in the transportation of these materials. Incidents may also include the illegal or terrorist use of radiological material in use as a nuclear device or as an adjunct to a conventional explosive in a “dirty bomb” configuration. The following basic information and Standard Operating Guidelines involving radiological materials is provided to supplement the firefighter’s knowledge in understanding the hazards and problems arising from radiation emergencies. Safety measures in conjunction with proper use of the radiation detection instruments will insure an effective fire/rescue operation. RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS PRESENT A HAZARD TO THE FIREFIGHTER WHICH SHOULD NEITHER BE UNDULY FEARED NOR IGNORED. Fire Department Responsibilities and Controls First arriving units shall initiate Incident Command and refer to the Emergency Response Guidebook on initial response. The 2012 Emergency Response Guidebook offers some basic guidelines to follow in radiological emergencies in the “orange pages,” Guides 161 through 166. The following items indicate the nature of the actions that may be required of fire personnel when they arrive at the scene of a radiological emergency: 1. Radiological monitoring shall be instituted at all radiological emergency scenes. Monitoring for the presence of radiation shall also be instituted at all non -accidental or suspicious explosion scenes. Monitoring is vital for the protection of those in the immediate or adjacent radiation areas. Monitoring shall continue in the area for high radiation levels if repeated entry or extensive duty in the area is required for rescue or firefighting.
A. R33, R60 and R160 shall be dispatched to the scene of a known or potential radiological incident. B. Be aware of the possibility of secondary devices. C. Isolate spill or leak area for at least 75 feet in all directions. Considerations must be given to expand this area 1,000 to 4,000 ft. if the scene is a potential WMD event. Only qualified explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) technicians should conduct searches for secondary devices. Request the Omaha Police Dept. Bomb Squad for this operation. D. First arriving units shall wear full PPE with SCBA as appropriate. HazMat personnel may need to use Level A or B protection for entry. E. The recorded radiation levels will help determine the decisions the officer in charge of the emergency will make in regard to risking radiation exposures to fire personnel, relative to the benefits that may be derived from the risk. F. Control of exposure time can be established by predicting approximate dose rates and safety limits to be observed during an emergency involving radioactivity. 2. Control movement of fire personnel into an area either suspected or known to be contaminated with radioactive materials. Entry into the hot zone shall only occur if rescuers are properly protected or levels of radiation are at a safe level. 3. Extinguishing or containing a fire to save a life or minimize injury to people o r property. This should only occur if rescuers are properly protected or levels of radiation are at a safe level. Fire personnel should not expose themselves to unsafe levels of radiation. 4. Rescue of victims involved in the incident. First arriving units may need to set up a gross decontamination corridor and give verbal commands to ambulatory (walking wounded) victims. Rescue of non-ambulatory victims will not occur until rescuers are properly protected or levels of radiation are at safe level. (Refer t o Special Operations 2-1 “Radiological Patient Handling Procedures” for proper procedures concerning the handling of patients from a radiological incident). 5. Seek advice if possible from personnel who have the immediate responsibility for the supervision of the materials as to the exact location and approximate radiation severity levels. 6. If there is further need for isolation of the radiation source or there is a contamination of the general area, technically qualified specialists and/or radiological assistance teams will respond on request of the Incident Commander.
The following is a list of the people or agencies to be notified:    Nuclear Physicist Veterans Hospital -- Telephone - 346-8800 (ask for the operator)    Radiological Assistance Team Offutt Air Force Base Telephone 294-5527 (Disaster Preparedness Office) Telephone - 680-0845 or 294-3725 (After Duty Hours)    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission Telephone – 301-816-5100 emergency. 800-695-9403 non-emergency.    *72nd Civil Support Team - Lincoln, NE - Telephone - 402-309-7581 *(This request must be made to the Governor through the State Emergency Management Agency {NEMA} via 911). Radiation Hazards - External/Internal. Gamma Radiation Gamma Radiation can be defined as waves of pure energy traveling at the speed of light. This type of radiation is highly penetrating and presents the severest external radiation hazard to the firefighter. It must be remembered that emergency handling of Gamma radiation exposure cases should not be feared. An individual may have received a lethal dose of Gamma radiation but he is no hazard to those around him or the environment. He is no different than the radiation therapy or diagnostic X-Ray patient in that he does not emit radiation. External radiation does not make people or materials radioactive and they may be handled in a normal way after the radiation source has been isolated or removed by a qualified specialist. People exposed to the radiation are not a hazard but the source of the radiation still is. If victims are still close to the source of the radiation and rescuers are sent in then they will be exposed. Victims that self-evacuate shall be decontaminated if possible.
Protective Factors (Gamma). TIME Radiation dose levels to firefighters shall be kept at a minimum by closely observing time limits to exposure under continuous rescue or firefighting operations. DISTANCE All personnel in the critical areas will remain as far from the radiation source as possible in coping with the emergency. The radiation level decreases rapidly as the distance from the source increases. The following diagram illustrates the Inverse Square Law. External radiation decreases rapidly as the square of the distance from the source increases. For instance, using the diagram we see that at the 10 foot level 1000 roentgens per hour is reduced to (1/100) of 1000 roentgens which is 10 r/hr. *One roentgen (R) of radiation upon striking the body produces one REM (roentgen equivalent man) of bodily damage. From this illustration, we can note that a firefighter extinguishing a fire from a distance of 10 feet would be sustaining an exposure of 10 r/hr. (confirmed by the use of a radiation meter, which shall always be in operation by personnel nearest the exposure source. Personnel should also be wearing a pocket dosimeter). (See instrumentation data). For example, by using the factors of time and distance for a 6 minute exposure at this distance to extinguish the fire, we can then determine the total accumulated dose to be: 6 min. = 1/10 hr. Total Dose = 1/10 hr. x 10 r/hr. = 1R
One roentgen, Total Dose, in this instance which is well within the permissible dose limit. (See permissible dose rate) SHIELDING Shielding of external (Gamma) radiation is the third protection factor. Portable shielding has little merit under emergency conditions in approaching or working radiation areas when we consider the weight factor involved. However, some heavy materials, concrete for example, provides some shielding and may be considered as an operational vantage point. Beta Radiation (External/Internal) Beta Radiation can be classified as an external, less penetrating type of radiation which presents a moderate hazard to fire personnel unless working in close proximity to materials emitting this type of radiation. It produces a moderate internal hazard. The distance factor again is stressed in addition to wearing full protective clothing, including SCBA and gloves, and immediate use of a radiation meter. (See instrumentation data.) Alpha Radiation (Internal) Alpha emitting materials (radioactive contamination) entering the body presents a severe internal hazard. Alpha radiation presents limited external hazard if it remains outside the body, because it cannot penetrate unbroken skin. Alpha radiation and contamination must be considered during all radiological emergencies as a severe internal hazard. It shall be mandatory for all fire personnel to wear full prote ctive clothing including masks when entering radiation areas. This procedure will be in effect until the radiation area is vacated or clearance is given by Omaha HazMat, a radiological assistance team, or a qualified technical specialist from the US Department of Energy. BASIC PROCEDURES A contamination control point (hot line) will be established on the perimeter of any hazard involving radiological emergencies. All entries to, and exits from, the danger zone should be made through this area. Fire personnel entering shall be wearing full protective clothing and wearing a self-contained breathing apparatus. Note: Any radiation in excess of 30 u R/hr. or twice the normal background radiation will be considered as a radiological exposure incident. (Normal background readings range from 8-15 u R/hr.). Note: (1) R/hr.         =            (1,000) m R/hr. = (1,000,000) u R/hr.
The scintillator probe shall be used to detect gamma radiation levels and establish perimeters. (see Model 44-2 Scintillator Probe instrumentation use) A hot line is any established control line separating a radiation-contaminated area from the contamination free area. If applicable it will normally be established up -wind from the emergency point. Several hot zones may exist due to pocketing of settled radiological dust/debris. Radioactive contamination can in most cases be removed through an emergency decontamination procedure. Radioactive contamination that cannot be easily removed is considered "fixed contamination". Clothing or equipment with fixed contamination must be isolated for treatment or proper disposal. Personnel conducting contamination procedures shall wear full protective clothing including self-contained breathing apparatus. No personnel shall be permitted entry access beyond the established hot line unless actively involved in fire/rescue operations. Emergency Action Dose Limit Guidelines: Dose Limit (whole Emergency Action Dose Limit Guidelines / Activity body)             Performed 5 rem             All activities. 5 rem                 Protecting major property. 12.5 rem              Lifesaving or protection of large populations >12.5 rem             Lifesaving or protection of large populations, only by volunteers who understand the risks. *Example: 300 R/hr = 5 R/minute. At 300 R/hr personnel would be exposed to 5 Rem, the maximum dose limit (except for lifesaving), after 1 minute. Therefore, personnel would have to turn back after 30 seconds (assuming that the distance to return to the cold zone is the same after entry).
Recommended Dose Rates: Dose Rate                     Actual Values Contaminated persons          300 counts per minute above background reading Hot Zone Perimeter Line       2 x normal background reading Work in Hot Zone              < 10 R/hr. Turn-Back Dose Rate* (except for lifesaving) 10 R/hr. Turn-Back Dose Rate* (Even for lifesaving)         25 R/hr. *The Turn- Back Dose Limit shall be ½ of The Turn- Back Dose Rate. (see Emergency Action Dose Limit Guideline Table). The following illustrations depict a classroom exercise of personnel monitoring procedures at an established hot line or decontamination control point. Illustration No. 1 Illustration No. 1.  Member being monitored prior to leaving contaminated area. Monitoring and decontamination personnel must be fully clothed and wearing self-contained breathing apparatus. In illustrations, the monitor's helmet and mask have been removed to show head set being used. Illustration No. 2 Illustration No. 2. This illustration shows a member being assisted in the removal of his outer clothing. Removal of the mask should be delayed until all outer clothing has been decontaminated or removed.
Illustration No. 3 Illustration No. 3.    Radioactive contamination which cannot be easily removed is considered "fixed contamination".       Clothing or equipment with fixed contamination must be packaged and isolated for treatment or proper disposal. Members should isolate turnout coat and boots as shown. Illustration No. 4 Illustration No. 4. Before leaving the hot line or contamination control point, a member is again monitored with special emphasis placed on the location of any "hot spots" on the individual after outer garments and equipment are removed. Upon completion of monitoring procedures, each Company officer shall be responsible for including all pertinent information on the Radiation Exposure Record (OFD 286). This record will be retained with the radiological monitoring instruments stored on Resc ue 33, Rescue 60, and all Battalion Chief Vehicles. Any time a member receives a measurable radiation exposure dose, the Company officer or members' supervisor shall forward a letter with all information concerning the incident through channels to the Chief of the Department. This information will subsequently be entered in a Master Radiological Emergency Accumulation Dosage Chart. No personnel shall be allowed continuation of activity (except for lifesaving) if accumulated dose exposure is >10 Rem or dose limit exposure is >5 Rem. For life saving activity accumulated dose shall not be >25 Rem or a dose limit exposure of >12.5 Rem.
RADIATION EXPOSURE RECORD Name: ______________________________ Dosimeter Ser. No. ____ Company: ________________________ Shift: __________________ Initial            Accumulated       Total Dosimeter          Dosimeter         Dose Date              Reading            Reading           To Date OFD 286 Radiological Instruments used by Omaha Fire: Radiological Instruments carried on Rescue 33 and Rescue 60 are the Ludlum 2241-2 Survey Instrument, CDV 777, and CDV 742 Pocket Dosimeters. Rescue 33 and Rescue 60 also carry the RAE Gamma 11R, Neutron RAE 11, and Multi RAE Pro-Gamma meters. All Battalion Chief vehicles carry the Ludlum 2241-2 Survey Instrument. Operating instructions for the Ludlum 2241-2 Survey Instrument and the CDV 742 Pocket Dosimeters are listed below. The operating instructions for the CDV 777, and the Siemens Emergency Response Radiological Monitor shall be covered in R33 and R60’s technical handbook. Ludlum 2241 Survey Instrument: The Model 2241-2 is a portable microprocessor-based digital Ratemeter/Scaler designed for use with a variety of detector types for measurement of ionizing radiation. The data is presented on a 4-digit (6 digits while in the scaler mode) Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) with a moving decimal point. A three-position switch labeled OFF/RATEMETER/SCALER selects the desired operating mode for the instrument. A locking toggle switch labeled DET 1 and DET 2 allows for a quick change of operating parameters between detectors. The Model 2241-2 features adjustable alarm set points for the RATEMETER and SCALER operating mode. The RATEMETER mode has two alarm indications. The first level alarm is indicated by the word ALERT on the LCD. The second level alarm is indicated by the word ALARM and a continuous audible tone. The SCALER alarm condition will also display the word ALARM and produce the same audible tone. Both of the audible alarms can be
silenced/acknowledged by depressing the RESET switch. Alarm parameters are set during instrument calibration. The RATEMETER mode shall be utilized by OFD personnel during all surveying operations. The Scaler mode may be utilized when an outside agency is assisting the OFD at an Incident. The Unit is operated with two-"D" cell flashlight batteries (“D” batteries shall be stored outside of the instrument when not in use). The unit body is made of cast and drawn aluminum with polyurethane paint which aids in decontamination of surfaces. Ludlum 2241 Survey Instrument: The Ludlum 2241 Radiological Survey Meter comes with a Model 44-9 (Pancake/Frisker) Probe and the Model 44-2 Gamma Scintillator Probe When operated with the Model 44-9 (pancake/frisker) probe detector, the instrument is capable of detecting the presence of alpha, beta, gamma, and x-ray radiation contamination. When operated with the Model 44-2 scintillator probe it is capable of detecting low level gamma radiation. Model 44-9 (Pancake) Probe:
The size and shape of the 44-9 provides easy handling for surveying personnel and equipment. The pancake detector is to be used when surveying personnel, victims, civilians, and equipment for contamination. During operation with this probe, the survey instrument will take readings in Counts Per Minute (C/m). Normal background level is approximately 100 C/m. An individual or equipment is considered contaminated when readings reach 300 C/m above normal background levels. Model 44-2 Gamma Scintillator Probe: The Ludlum Model 44-2 Gamma Scintillator Probe will detect low levels of gamma radiation. Some common applications for this detector include background radiation monitoring and low level radiation detection. This probe shall be used when establishing perimeters and conducting area survey (College World Series). During operation with this probe, the survey instrument will take readings in u R/hr. Once 1,000 u R/hr. is reached the unit will convert to m R/hr. Once 1,000 m R/hr. is reached the unit will convert to R/hr. (1/1,000 u R/hr. = 1 m R/hr. 1/1,000 m R/hr. = 1 R/hr.). For additional information concerning the probes refer to the instruction manuals for each probe kept inside the black pelican case which contain the survey meter and probes.
Operating Procedure for the Ludlum Model 2241-2 1. Check the Calibration expiration date, if the instrument calibration is past due, do not use the instrument. 2. Visually inspect the instrument for damage. If there is damage which impairs the use of the instrument do not use the instrument. 3. Ensure the Model 2241-2 power switch is in the OFF position. Open the battery lid and install two "D" size batteries. Note (+) (-) marks on the inside of the lid. Match the battery polarity to these marks. Close the battery box lid. 4. Connect either the scintillator or pancake probe detector to the instrument and position the detector select switch accordingly. 5. Turn the OFF/RATEMETER/SCALER switch to the RATEMETER position. The display will go through a start-up sequence. The display will show all 8s with decimal points. Check to make sure all segments of each number display are functioning. 6. After the start-up sequence is complete, the unit will show the typical operating screen with the display auto ranging to the current radiation level in either R/hr . or C/m, depending on which position the detector select switch is in. 7. Expose the detector to an external check source if the background count is too low to generate a display reading. Switch the AUD ON/OFF to the ON position and confirm the external speaker produces and audible click. Normal operating model should be with the AUD ON/OFF toggle switch in the ON position. 8. Switch to the Scaler position. Depress the Count switch located in the end of the carrying handle to start the count cycle. The word "COUNTING" should be visible in the display during the count cycle and should disappear at the end of the preset count time. Count time is set during instrument calibration, and is typically set for six seconds. 9. Depress and release the LIGHT switch. The backlight located behind the LCD should illuminate. 10. Select the desired F/S, AUD ON/OFF, and RATEMETER or SCALER parameters and proceed to use instrument.
The RATEMETER mode shall be utilized by OFD personnel during all surveying operations. The Scaler mode may be utilized when an outside agency is assisting the OFD at an Incident. Operating Controls for the Ludlum Model 2241-2 Off/Ratemeter/Scaler Switch: A three-position rotary switch which applies power to the instrument and selects the RATEMETER or SCALER counting modes. DETector Select Switch: A protected toggle switch that toggles between DET 1 and DET 2 parameters. The pull-and-change toggle switch is designed to protect against inadvertent changes. The switch is to be set to DET 1 (red) when the pancake probe is attached; units displayed will be C/m. Set the switch to DET 2 (yellow) when the scintillator probe is attached; units displayed will auto range from uR/hr. to mR/hr. to R/hr. The scintillator probe shall be used to detect gamma radiation levels and establish perimeters. AUD ON/OFF Switch: The audio may be silenced or enabled via this toggle switch. The audible ALARM is independent of the AUD ON/OFF switch. F/S (Fast/Slow) Response Switch: A two position toggle switch with selects Fast or Slow counting response time. The fast response setting should be used when performing an initial survey or when trying to locate sources of radiation. Switch to slow response when more accurate measurements are needed (e.g. for official measurements). Light (LCD Backlight): A pushbutton switch, when depressed, illuminates the LCD for a pre- programmed period of time. RESET Pushbutton Switch: In the non-alarm condition, depressing the RESET switch resets the Ratemeter display to the minimum display readout. In an alarm condition, depressing the RESET will silence the audible alarm; depressing the RESET Switch a second time will reset the Ratemeter alarm and/or alert condition. The Scaler alarm can only be reset by depressing the Scaler to start the counting cycle. Scaling time is set during instrument calibration and can be set from 1 to 999 seconds. Depressing the Count switch after a Scaler ALARM will reset the Scaler display to "0" resetting the alarm condition. CDV-742 Pocket Dosimeter Capacity Limits: 0-200 r/hr. Use: High Range Detection (Gamma)
Primary Fire Service Use: This instrument measures total dose of Gamma radiation to the exposed individual. (Does not measure Beta or Alpha radiation.) No personnel shall be allowed continuation of activity (except for lifesaving) if accumulated dose exposure is >10 Rem. For life saving activity accumulated dose shall not be >25 Rem. This dosimeter shall be worn by all personnel in suspected or known radiation areas. If the dosimeter is exchanged between personnel during a radiological emergency it must be recalibrated to read ZERO or the previous reading must be recorded by the individual making his initial entry into radiation areas in order to correctly measure his total dose exposure. Dosimeters should be read frequently to insure safety limitations. CDV-742: Miscellaneous Information:    Radioactive particles presenting high internal hazard conditions may be distributed by smoke, air currents, and water resulting from fire control efforts.    Fire overhaul shall be limited in areas where radioactive materials are involved.    Be alert for posted radiation warning symbols, placards, or signs.    Proper knowledge of the detection instrument to be used at a particular time is of the utmost importance. Inoperative detection instruments are of no value to the fire service.
OPERATIONAL CHECK – CIVIL DEFENSE RADIOLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS The following procedure shall be used for the Operational Check of the Civil Defense Instruments. These instruments are to be checked quarterly by Rescue 33 and/or Rescue 60 personnel: CDV-742 Pocket Dosimeter Check There is no operational check for dosimeters similar to the check of survey instruments. However, they do have electrical leakage characteristics and will be checked on a scheduled basis (once every two months) for proper zero calibration. The CDV-742 shall be read before advancing into a suspected or known radiation area and if an electrical leakage rate is present on the scale, the reading will be subtracted from the total accumulated exposure dose. CDV-750 Dosimeter Charger Check The only check necessary on this instrument shall be checking if the lamp is dim or does not light. If this condition exists after battery replacement, maintenance will be performed by Civil Defense personnel only. Note: When instruments are stored, batteries shall be removed and stored in the instrument case. Radiological Equipment Check Form: Quarterly, all radiological Instruments shall be checked. The OFD 287 Form shall be used for this check and forwarded to the Special Operations Captain upon completion. The Ludlum 2241-2 stored on Battalion Vehicles shall be checked by personnel assigned to the Station where the Battalion Vehicle is located (R33/R60 may be requested to assist). R33/R60 personnel are responsible for all Radiological Equipment Checks for the radiologica l equipment assigned to Rescue 33 and Rescue 60. This form shall be stored in all radiological monitor containers.
RADIATION DETECTION EQUIPMENT CHECK FORM DATE: ______________________________ Ludlum 2241-2 _______________ CDV 777 __________________ CDV-742__________________ CDV-750__________________ CHECKED BY: ________________________ Remarks: OFD 287
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 3-0 WMD INCIDENT RESPONSE FOR THE FIRST RESPONDER REVISION HISTORY REVISION                                 DATE REVISION DESCRIPTION                        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY #                                    REVISED 1            Periodic Revision       Nov 2015       Nguyen 815       Olson 1021        Olsen 640 2              E23 Updates           Aug 2025        Witte 995    McLaughlin 1035     Bossman 729 TYPES OF WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (WMD) DEVICES    Chemical    Biological    Radiological    Nuclear    Explosive Recognizing Danger When assessing the scene and determining a possible WMD incident, you should consider clues provided by the dispatcher’s report. Some other issues to be raised should be to the:    Type of building or occupancy    Unexplained number of casualties    Unexplained nature of casualties    Signs and symptoms of victims (see additional information concerning a nerve agent exposure)    Unusual dead or dying animals    Unusual liquid, spray, vapor    Suspicious devices and/or packages The Incident Commander shall contact Rescue 33 and/or Rescue 60 as soon as possible to verify the nature of the incident and the corrective actions that may need to be taken prior to their arrival. Goal for First Responder Respond safely and decontaminate quickly without becoming victims.

--- SP OPS 3-0 ---
First Responder Priorities    Protect Yourself    Never rush in, taste, touch, or smell anything! o Use Full PPE ▪ All fire gear ▪ SCBA – as appropriate. ▪ Green “Nitrile” Gloves (Special hazmat gloves only carried on R1 and R60) o Control the Scene (Identify the hot, warm, and cold zones) ▪ Anticipate a secondary device. o Initiate Incident Command o Recognize the Danger and notify incoming apparatus of the situation o Request additional responders o Notify Hospitals o Rescue and Decontaminate the Victims Controlling the Scene    Initiate Incident Command    Update dispatch and incoming apparatus    Identify and mark the exclusion zone, “hot, and warm zones”    Identify the Command post location and staging area location for incoming apparatus. Location shall be 1000’ – 4,000’ from the incident location.    Evacuate ambulatory (walking wounded) casualties away from the high hazard area or “hot zone” to the “warm zone” for decontamination. Treatment shall be located in the cold zone.    Deny access to all but trained personnel in appropriate PPE.    Request additional help: o Additional alarms as necessary o TC1 and FC71 o Additional medic units o HAZMAT Units; Rescue 33, Rescue 60/160, E33, E23 and Decon Task Force 65 o Notify Hospitals o Omaha Police ERU Team which includes the S.W.A.T. team, Bomb Squad, Clandestine Lab Team (HAZMAT Technician trained), and Mobile Command Post.
Other Local Resources:    Douglas County Emergency Management Office (Through OFD 911 Dispatcher)    Tri- Mutual Aid Fire Departments    Offutt AFB: o Offutt Chemical Weapons Team o Medical Staff o Personnel    Douglas County Health Department    Douglas County Crime Lab (mobile Mass Spectrometer and CAD System)    72nd Civil support Team (Request made to the governor through the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency {NEMA} via 911) ▪   Calling for assistance early will help reduce response times. Help will come from a variety of agencies, including Federal resources: Urban Search and Rescue Team (USAR), Dept. of Defense, Dept. of Energy, Public Health agencies, Center for Disease Control, the FBI, etc. Rescue & Decontaminate the Victims First responder actions within the first 15 minutes following a WMD attack will be criti cal in saving lives. Always decontaminate anyone whose skin, clothing, or shoes may have been in contact with an agent. Use water to quickly remove or dilute the greatest amount of contaminants from victims. Establish secondary decontamination sites as needed. **Nearly 80% of contaminates can be eliminated by removing outer clothing Examples of emergency decontamination devices    Handheld hoselines – wide, low pressure fog stream (immediate use)    Aerial & Deluge pipes – wide, low pressure fog stream (immediate use)    Decontamination tents – Rescue 65 Decontamination Task Force 65    Gross Decontamination Corridor (One aerial and two engines) Additional Information Anticipating the secondary device    What used to be a mere possibility is now a very real probability.    When making a response to an explosion or unknown blast it is imperative that we realize that an IED (improvised explosive device) has been used. We cannot allow
complacence to dictate our thinking and just accept the dispatcher description of what is going on. We need to have a proactive approach to all responses and consider terrorist acts as a real possibility.    Think before rushing in…it is important to not become complacent…it is important to change the way you respond. Be prudent when arriving on the scene of a possible bomb blast and think before you transmit. Have all members of responding units secure radios in the off position if an IED is suspected. A cell phone or radio can kill…Radio frequency energy can cause the detonation of a secondary device. This possibility includes the broadcast equipment of news media.    It is important that we realize that as the responding agency we now place ourselves in harm’s way, we have become targets. Searching for a secondary device    Perimeters should be established quickly and no fire personnel shall enter the established “hot” zone until a thorough search for secondary devices has been completed. Searches should be conducted only by qualified explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) technicians. Request the Omaha Police Dept. Bomb Squad for this operation.    Verbal commands should be given to ambulatory (walking wounded) for self-rescue and decontamination.    Victims that require technical extrication should not be extricated until the area has been cleared by qualified explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) technician.    Improvised explosive devices can be easily disguised and may be concealed in seemingly harmless objects. Do not touch or move anything at or near the bomb scene. Suspicious items should be brought to the attention of EOD technicians.    Two recent examples of this are the Atlanta Abortion Clinic bombing where the convicted serial bomber used a secondary device successfully nearly killing several investigators. In Puerto Rico a Police Officer was killed by a bomb that was packed in a flashlight left on the ground of an IED incident.    Considering that secondary devices target first responders, the bomber may anticipate where staging areas and command posts are likely to be situated. Searches for secondary devices should include those areas.
Managing the scene effectively - Extensions of the boundaries of bomb scene perimeters can save lives.    Extend the “Exclusion Zone” at least 1,000 to 4,000 feet horizontally and vertically to reduce the potential of injury to first responders.    Command posts and staging areas should be located upwind of the scene of the explosion to reduce the possibility of exposure to airborne toxins or hazardous vapors that may have been released or caused by the blast. The command post and staging area must be visually and manually inspected of potential IED secondary devices. Request the Omaha Police Dept. Bomb Squad for this operation.    Access should be strictly controlled until a search for secondary devices is complete and thereafter to protect the crime scene.    It is recommended that the command post, staging area, and triage, treatment, and transport area be moved 1,000 – 4,000 feet from the scene. When choosing these areas look for a large area, clear of vehicles, away from buildings, and free of containers and suspicious items. Be aware that there may be more than one explosive device at the scene. These areas should be large enough to accommodate not only a relatively large number of victims, but also the land ing of a medi-vac helicopter. The helicopter should not be used until the area is swept by EOD personnel due to vibration and property wash.    Be aware of damage to infrastructure in the area of the explosion such as gas lines and tanks, electrical transformers, downed power lines, etc., that may create additional hazards for first responders. Evidence Recovery - Document everything.    Scene documentation, preservation of evidence, and the chain of custody are the three critical factors in any investigation.    Remember that first responder’s clothing, shoes, and equipment all take evidence away from the crime scene. Even the bodies and clothing of victims may contain valuable evidence.    OFD personnel shall document in the FRMS system to the best of their ability where the victims were located, if they had to move any structures or materials to remove
the victim from the scene, unusual items or circumstances surrounding the victim, etc.     When responding to a possible explosion it is important to listen to victims accounts of what happened, how did it sound, and how did it look. This information will be needed by the Crime Scene Investigators. Signs & Symptoms of a nerve agent exposure    Typically the acronym “SLUDGE” can be used to identify the signs & symptoms of people exposed to nerve agents such as Sarin or VX. Salivation (copious drooling) Lacrimation (copious eye watering, runny nose, sweating) Urination (uncontrolled) Defecation (uncontrolled) Gastrointestinal (gastric distress, pain, cramps, etc.) Emesis (vomiting) In addition to those items listed above, victims may also show the following signs:    Dyspnea    Loss of consciousness    Seizure    Weakness    Flaccid paralysis
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 3-1 RESPONSE TO SUICIDE BOMBING INCIDENTS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #     REVISION DESCRIPTION                              DATE REVISED        AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 1                      Periodic Review                          Nov 2015        Nguyen 815      Salcedo 816        Olsen 640 DEFINING SUICIDE TERRORISM Suicide terrorism can be defined as premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by sub national groups or clandestine agents, with the certain death of the perpetrator being a precondition of mission success. With the death of the perpetrator being a precondition of mission success, more complex missions can be attempted because the most difficult aspect of any type of attack is the escape. With there being no need for an escape, terrorists can plan and execute missions that otherwise they might shy away from. Therefore, suicide terrorism is a great force multiplier and has tactical advantages over conventional terrorist attacks. The term suicide bomber is synonymous with homicide bomber. Their intent is to kill and injure as many people as possible and to disrupt society. TYPES OF SUICIDE ATTACKS Suicide attacks are categorized into three types. Type I Type I devices, the bomb is typically concealed in an object with cursory camouflage to hide the device from casual observation. Typical device sizes range from 11 -33 pounds of explosives, not including any additional fragmentation material. Devices may be concealed in ordinary items intended to blend into the target environment. Type II Type II devices involve use of “body bombs” which is useful for Type II – Person-borne                          the infiltration of the target area by terrorists. Body bombs • 1 - 22 pounds (or more) of explosives • Disguise personal                                 typically contain from 1 to 22 pounds of explosives; their size is appearance (army uniform, ethnic clothing, cleric limited only by the need to conceal the device under clothing. robes, dyed hair, hair style, etc.) • Dress for the Bombers often use explosives such as TNT, Semtex, dynamite situation - heavy clothing not                                      or improvised high explosives such as TATP (a peroxide based required improvised explosive). The devices may be worn under the EMERGENCY OPERATIONS SENSITIVE   Module 2 Slide 7 clothing as a belt by the bomber or built into an outer garment.

--- SP OPS 3-1 ---
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                       SP OPS 3-1 In some cases, the explosives are contained in metal or PVC pipe, generating an enhanced fragmentation effect. Devices of this kind are typically initiated using an electric blasting cap. A 9-volt or larger battery typically supplies power. Initiation is controlled using a simple switch concealed in a pocket of the outer clothing, the bomber’s trousers or run through a sleeve to the bomber’s hand. In some cases, the inner liner of an item of clothing is removed, the pipes or other devices are inserted and the liner replaced, making identification based on casual visual inspection extremely difficult. Some bombers have used an apron with pouches in the front for securing pipes or other explosive devices. This type of configuration permits the carrying of more explosives; however, such clothing configurations are difficult to conceal. Often, these devices include nails, bolts or nuts between layers of sheet metal; they serve as shrapnel upon detonation of the device. Type III Suicide bombers who use vehicles (Type III devices) can use a Type III – Vehicle Bomb                         variety of explosives selected based on characteristics of the • Use vehicles that “fit in” (security, target, materials available to the bomber, and his/her level of ambulance, etc.) • Large quantities of technical knowledge. explosives • Recent Iraq car bombs average 40 - Often, these devices are initiated by depressing an electrical 70 lbs. high explosives                                       switch mounted near the vehicle driver. In such attacks, EMERGENCY OPERATIONS SENSITIVE   Module 2 Slide 10 additional personnel have often accompanied the bomber to attack or distract security personnel. PRE AND POST BLAST PROCEDURES Personal Protection Actions - Pre Blast If fire crews are sent to a scene where there is a bomb threat then they should pre -stage personnel and vehicles in an inconspicuous safe area, away from dumpsters or areas that could contain secondary devices until a staging area has been established. Under these circumstances, do not radio the exact location of apparatus. Give an “on location” to command unless directed otherwise by command. Be conscious of secondary devices or secondary handlers with the ability to remotely detonate suicide bomb devices. It is often the intent of terrorists to lure responders into an area and then activate another device. So consider “Blast Zone” perimeter to be the “Kill Zone”.
Pre-Blast Response Primary response of all fire personnel to any potential terrorist activity will consist of staging at a safe distance and organizing resources in case an event does happen. Fire crews should not be involved in extricating buildings or areas in which a bomb threat has been made. Tactical paramedics, on and off duty, will also be deployed to command post at the discretion of the IC or Chief of Department. Tactical paramedics will be directed via landline to the location of the command post in order to receive assignment. Lockdown procedures are to be implemented at all fire stations. All apparatus doors and entrances are to be closed and locked. All FAE’s will stay with their apparatus during emergency runs. Numerous agencies have guidelines for pre-blast perimeters. These are recommended minimum perimeters in respect to the public and first responders. In a suicide bombing incident, these tools in concert with local bomb tech guidance should be adhered to f or everyone with the exception of those tactically involved with containing an active threat.
Explosive Capacity - Based upon maximum volume or weight of explosives (TNT equivalent) that can reasonably fit or be hidden in a suitcase or vehicle. Personal Protection Actions - Post Blast Implement Incident Command System and incident security plan. Assess scene and call for additional resources. Establish Command post, staging area, EMS Branch/Group, set initial security perimeters. Consider using Omaha Police Department Officers to assist with security at the mobile command post, staging areas, EMS treatment/transport areas, and site security. Notify hospital emergency rooms of approximate number of patients and if WMD was identified. Local hospitals need to be notified as quickly as possible when WMD incident is recognized. They must contact, organize, set up and suit up the decontamination teams. This process takes at least 20 minutes. Incident Tasks Below are some tasks that may need to be performed from detonation to de-escalation of the incident. EMS Tasks    Evaluate and recognize that the scene may involve Hazardous Materials or Weapons of Mass Destruction.    Decontamination procedures.    Triage, treatment, and transport of patients in accordance to mass casualty policy.    Transport officer contacts medical treatment facilities and recommends more emergency room security Suppression Tasks    Fire Control    Air monitoring and site evaluation for Hazardous Materials and Weapons of Mass Destruction.    Decontamination if needed    Evaluate structural stability    Technical rescues (High Angle, Confined Spaced) The #1 priority for all emergency responders is responder safety. Absolutely no fire personnel should enter a blast area until the bomb squad with OPD has cleared the area.
Command will deploy, Mass Casualty Trailers and Tactical Paramedics to appropriate locations to conduct triage, treatment, and transport. All personnel on scene of a post blast incident will attach Personal Accountability Tag, (P.A.T.), chest high on the outside of turnout gear for rapid identification verification. Upon entry into “Hot Zone”, P.A.T. will be handed to entry officer. Upon exit of “Hot Zone” personnel will get their P.A.T. back. P.A.T. will remain visible throughout incident. Identification verification of personnel entering the incident area will create a safer scene for all first responders.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 3-2 DECONTAMINATION TASK FORCE 65 REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED        AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1                New Format             Nov 2015       Schneider 828     Olson 1021          Olsen 640 PURPOSE If determination is made that a Haz-Mat or WMD incident is in effect and requires the response of the R65 WMD apparatus. A battalion chief and (3) three designated companies (one unit must be an engine company) will form a Decontamination Task Force and assemble at Station 65. All units will respond lights and siren to Station 65. This Decontamination Task Force including the R65 WMD Trailer will leave Station 65 and go to the scene as a unit. The battalion chief shall oversee the forming of the Decon Task Force which will include the decontamination unit at the scene. Dispatch shall maintain a list of companies that have been identified by the Special Operations Chief who have received the necessary training to respond to such a request.     E65, E63, E61, E60, T61, and T63 shall serve as the pool of OFD units for this task force     B6 shall ensure that a minimum of two personnel are qualified to drive R65     B6 shall take measures to ensure that a minimum of one personnel qualified to drive R65 is on duty every shift for each apparatus within this pool. This would be a goal dictated by daily manpower.  The Decontamination Task Force pool of apparatus shall conduct semi-annually training on procedures with the R65 and decontamination equipment. Each FAE and FF qualified to drive R65 within B6 shall practice driving R65 during this semi- annually training. It will be the responsibility of B6 to coordinate this training and to ensure that the pool of crews meet this training assignment.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 7-0 CARBON MONOXIDE RESPONSE REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED     AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY     APPROVED BY 1            Format change          Nov 2015       Jones 869      Olson 1021       Olsen 640 2         CO Response Update        May 2019      Langlois 888   Bossman 729       Olsen 640 PURPOSE This SOP establishes a procedure for the Omaha Fire Department’s response to reports of carbon monoxide (CO) incidents. GENERAL Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless and tasteless gas that is deadly. It is the by - product of a fuel burning process when fossil fuels are burned. Many appliances, such as hot water heaters, furnaces, kitchen stove, automobiles and gas grills, can produce CO. If malfunctioning or faulty equipment exists, CO may be vented into areas where people are present. Carbon monoxide may produce severe flu-like symptoms, which may include dizzy spells, headache, nausea and fatigue. . Dangerous level of CO begin at 35 PPM, although low levels of CO can build up over time in human blood and cause serious health effects. Most CO detectors tolerate 15 PPM for eight hours before sounding an alarm. Detectors may sound an alarm at 400 PPM before 15 minutes elapse and may also sound an alarm at 100 PPM before 90 minutes elapse. Exposure of 100 PPM for four hours can result in headaches, at 400 PPM a headache can result after only 35 minutes and a two-hour exposure would be fatal. PROCEDURES The Omaha Fire Department will adhere to the maximum safe level of 35 PPM CO in the workplace and 9-PPM for residential occupancies. The OFD responds to numerous Carbon Monoxide (CO) responses each week. The allowable maximum limits for CO are 9 PPM for residential and 35 PPM for business occupancies. MUD shall be notified, and respond on any CO incident to assist and/or confirm meter readings. The Metropolitan Utilities District (MUD) presently treats CO calls the same as a gas leak and will respond, although it may not be a CO problem. NOTE: OSHA rules allow a reading of 35 PPM in a workplace over an eight-hour period. Consult their Safety Officer for their allowable limits (OSHA requires plant management provide this information).

--- SP OPS 7-0 ---
Many types of CO detectors are available to the public, and if detector literature is available, it should be consulted when attempting to resolve any problem. Interviews with the occupants may also help in determining if there is a CO problem in the residence. In order to determine the location of leaks or the source of CO, monitoring must be done before ventilation takes place. Use and Maintenance of Monitoring devices    The monitoring device shall be used to monitor the atmosphere during any suspected CO incident.    Each morning the CO gas monitor device shall be examined, tested and results entered in the company journal.    Should any problem be noted, the Company Officer shall contact the Captain of Rescue 33 or Rescue 60, who will take steps to correct the problem. HAZMAT personnel from R33 shall provide monthly calibration for all CO monitors. Whenever maintenance or replacement of a CO monitor is necessary, an OFD 127 shall be submitted to the HAZMAT Coordinator.    Company Officers shall make sure that their assigned monitor is stored in a secured location on their apparatus. Alarm Verification and Response When the resident calls 911 and reports a detector sounding an alarm, 911 shall determine if the alarm is a smoke detector or a carbon monoxide detector. If it is determined that a CO detector is sounding, the resident will be asked if anyone at the location is unconscious. 1. If YES 911 will have the residents open all windows and doors, and have everyone who is able evacuate the building and wait for the Omaha Fire Department to arrive. 911 will dispatch a still alarm (engine, truck with CO meter, and Battalion Chief) and medic unit emergency status. 2. If NO and detector sounding only, 911 will have residents evacuate the building and wait for the Omaha Fire Department to arrive. 911 will dispatch a Fire Company with a CO monitor non-emergency status. 3. If a CO detector is sounding and a neighbor reports the detector sounding but is unable to positively confirm if resident is home, 911 will dispatch a Fire Company with a CO monitor non-emergency status. 4. Remote monitoring of CO detectors in residences is a service offered through various private security monitoring agencies. When an agency reports this type of an alarm, 911 will dispatch the nearest a Fire Company with a CO monitor non-emergency status. 5. Response to requests for assistance with CO detectors will be made by the nearest Fire Company with a CO monitor for assessing CO PPM.
On-Scene Procedures When a Fire Company arrives on scene it shall verify if the alarm is coming from a smoke detector or a carbon monoxide detector. 1. If it is a smoke alarm:  Investigate the cause of the alarm.  Advise the 911 of the situation.  Take necessary steps to mitigate the situation. 2. If it is a carbon monoxide detector:  Determine if anyone is exhibiting any symptoms of possible CO poisoning. If so, immediately evacuate, if not already evacuated, and initiate patient care.  Request medic unit response if necessary.  Advise 911 as needed.  Begin the investigative procedure.  Request the Metropolitan Utilities District (MUD) to respond to the scene. 3. If it is a remote monitored CO detector, or if it is a CO detector reported by a neighbor and they are unable to positively confirm if anyone is or is not inside, the Incident Commander must be able to either make sure that the occupants are in no danger or the residence is unoccupied. Forcible entry should be strongly considered if:    The Incident Commander cannot verify that the residence is unoccupied.    The Incident Commander does not know length of time it will take an alarm representative to arrive on the scene to verify that the residence is not occupied. Life safety is imperative, and seconds count if someone is inside and under the influence of CO gas. The Incident Commander should consider the easiest least costly method of forcible entry and notify 911 that a law enforcement agency is needed for scene security. Every effort should be made to secure the residence before it is turned over to the law enforcement agency. Carbon Monoxide Investigation Procedures 1. If responding to a CO alarm with a reported unconscious person, OFD personnel shall don SCBA, breathing air, prior to entry. In all other CO responses, all personnel must don SCBA with face piece removed during initial monitoring. This will allow for immediate use of SCBA should a high level of CO be encountered. 2. Zero CO monitor in fresh air and comply with all other start up procedures as recommended by the manufacturer of the CO monitor. 3. Close all windows, doors and turn the furnace thermostat down. Do not allow anyone to enter or exit the residence for at least 10 minutes. This time period may allow for any possible CO gas to accumulate
4. Initiate a survey of the premises to determine if there are any amounts of CO present above 9 PPM. 5. Record the results of the survey on an OFD Form 280. 6. Reading of 9 PPM or less:  Request response of MUD to confirm readings.    Inform the occupants that our instruments did not detect an elevated level of CO at this time.    Recommend occupants check their CO detector per manufacturer recommendation.    Advise the occupant to attempt to reset detector. FIREFIGHTERS SHALL NOT ATTEMPT TO RESET DETECTOR.    Do not attempt any repairs or adjustments to malfunctioning equipment.  Inform occupants of what actions you have taken and leave an OFD Form 281, CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ACTIVATION - NOTICE OF FINDINGS with the occupant. Inform occupants that if detector activates again, call 911. 7. Reading of more than 9 PPM, but less than 100 PPM:  Request response of MUD.    All personnel shall don SCBA equipment in any atmosphere that is in excess of 35 PPM of CO.    Any reading above 9 PPM in a residence or 35 PPM in a business occupancy shall be considered above normal readings.    Occupants shall be informed that we have detected a potentially dangerous level of CO.    Recommend that all occupants leave the premises and begin ventilation.    If it is determined that an appliance is malfunctioning and thereby producing CO, it shall be shut down.    Do not attempt any repairs or adjustments to malfunctioning equipment.    Once the premises have been reduced to a safe level of CO, the premises may be occupied at the discretion of the occupant.    Advise the occupant to attempt to reset their detector.  Inform occupants of what actions you have taken and leave an OFD Form 281, CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ACTIVATION - NOTICE OF FINDINGS with the occupant. Inform occupants that if detector activates again, call 911. 8. Readings of 100 PPM or greater:  Request response of MUD    Any reading above 100 PPM, inform the occupants that we have found a potentially lethal level of CO    Order occupants to leave the premises immediately.
   If it is determined that an appliance is malfunctioning and thereby producing CO, it shall be shut down.    Do not attempt any repairs or adjustments to malfunctioning equipment.    Once the premises have been reduced to a safe level of CO, the premises may be occupied at the discretion of the occupant.    Advise the occupant to attempt to reset their detector.    The occupants shall be informed of the action that has taken place and that MUD has been requested to respond. Inform occupants of what actions you have taken and leave an OFD Form 281, CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ACTIVATION - NOTICE OF FINDINGS with the occupant. Inform occupants that if detector activates again, call 911.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                  SP OPS 7-0 CARBON MONOXIDE FORMS The OFD Form 280, OMAHA FIRE DEPARTMENT - Carbon Monoxide Response Form shall be filled out by the Officer of the company that monitored for CO and forwarded to the Sp. Ops Coordinator via chain of command. CARBON MONOXIDE RESPONSE FORM Incident Location _____________________________________________________________ (Address) Incident Number _________________ Date __________________ Time ______________ _ Response Type [ ] Emergency [ ] Non-Emergency Responding Companies ________________________________________________________ Check List (List PPM to all that apply) PPM                                                       PPM Chimney           _______________                   Cook Top Vent           _______________ Fireplace         _______________                   Furnace          _______________ Portable Heater   _______________                   Gas Dryer               _______________ Water Heater      _______________                   Gas/Charcoal Grill     _______________ [ ]       [ ] Gas Refrigerator _______________                    Garage ATTACHED DETACHED _______________ Kitchen Stove     _______________                   Other                   _______________ Acceptable CO limits for a residence is 9 PPM and for a workplace it is 35 PPM. CO detector installed 15’ or more away from any fuel burning equipment. [ ] Yes [ ] No Comments / Actions taken ______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________ Company Officer Signature ____________________________________ ID Number __________ Forward to Haz Mat Coordinator via chain of command.
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                       SP OPS 7-0 The OFD Form 281, CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ACTIVATION - NOTICE OF FINDINGS, shall be filled out by the company officer and left with the occupant. CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ACTIVATION - NOTICE OF FINDINGS Carbon Monoxide is an odorless, tasteless and colorless gas that is DEADLY. It is a by -product of a fuel burning process. It can cause symptoms that can mimic the flu and may cause unconsciousness and even death. Many appliances around the home are capable of producing Carbon Monoxide when a faulty or unusual condition exists. Since the source may be transient in nature, the source may not always be detectable. The Omaha Fire Department responded to a possible carbon monoxide problem at: (location) _______________________________________________________________ , on      (date)___________________________,at (time)_____________________________. Carbon Monoxide (was/ was not) found by our instruments. This does not mean that this was a false alarm. Our instruments found the highest interior level of CO to be __________ PPM (parts per million) WHAT DOES THIS READING MEAN? 9 PPM or less: Our instruments did not detect elevated levels above 9 PPM at this time. However, this does not mean that higher levels did not exist before our arrival nor that higher levels will accumulate after our departure. Check your carbon monoxide detector per the manufacturer’s recommendations. Call the manufacturer for additional information (number may be on the back of the unit). Replace or reset detector as directed by the manufacturer’s specifications. More than 9 PPM: Our instruments have detected potentially dangerous levels of carbon monoxide. We recommend that you leave this building immediately. We feel that it is unsafe to re-occupy this building until repairs are made and your detector is replaced or reset according to manufacturer's specifications. 35 PPM: Maximum recommended concentration for continuous exposure in the workplace for any 8 hour period according to EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). l00 PPM or greater: We have detected a potentially lethal level of carbon monoxide in your home. Leave your building immediately! It is not safe until repairs are made or the source is found and corrected. Have your sources of carbon monoxide examined and if necessary repaired by a qualified technician. Replace or reset your detector according to manufacturer's specifications. Carbon Monoxide affects individuals differently depending on the size, age and medical history of the occupant(s). Therefore, families with young children, members with medical conditions or aged individuals, should take extra precautions in the event that Carbon Monoxide is detected. Issued by: (Officer) ________________________________________, (ID#) __________ , (company / shift)_______________ of the OMAHA FIRE DEPARTMENT on (date)________.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 10-0 TRENCH RESPONSE – AWARENESS LEVEL REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION         DATE REVISED         AUTHOR         REVIEWED BY   APPROVED BY 1             Periodic Review            May 2016       Richardson 860      Olsen 640     Olsen 640 PURPOSE A trench collapse is one of the most dangerous incidents we respond to. Many would-be rescuers are injured or killed because they do not recognize the warning signs of an unsafe trench. This SOP will provide Omaha Fire Department personnel with the knowledge necessary to safely manage the initial response to a trench collapse incident. POLICY Because of the potential for secondary collapse, Omaha Fire Department personnel shall not enter a trench or excavation until shoring or other safety measures have been taken to make the scene safe. This policy also applies to EMS personnel responding to medical emergencies at construction sites. First responders and EMS personnel shall not enter a trench or excavation that is not shored or made safe by other recognized means. DEFINITIONS Cohesive soil – Soil that can be compressed into a “clump” by hand. Compact soil appears hard and stable. Running soil – Loose, free flowing soil, such as sand. Running soil cannot be compressed into a clump. Saturated soil – Soil that contains an unusually high quantity of water. Excavation – An opening in the ground that results from a digging effort. Face or wall – The side of a trench extending from the lip to the floor. Floor – The bottom of a trench. Lip area- This is an area 2 ft. vertically and 2 ft. horizontally of the trench. Lock Out/Tag Out – A means of rendering safe electrical switches, utility supplies and mechanical equipment. Procedures include a device that allows the switch or valve to be locked and the provision for documenting who is responsible for applying and removing the lock. Recovery – Procedure taken to find and remove the body of a victim from the hazard that caused or contributed to his/her death.

--- SP OPS 10-0 ---
Rescue – The act of assisting a victim from a trapped position, whether it is a structure, vehicle, or other untenable situation. Spoil pile – The pile of material that has been excavated from a trench. Trench – A temporary excavation in which the length of the bottom exceeds the width of the bottom. The term “trench” is generally limited to excavations that are less than 15 feet wide at the bottom, and less than 20 feet deep. TYPES OF TRENCH COLLAPSE There are four main types of trench collapse: Spoil Pile Slide, Shear Wall, Slough In, and Lip Slide. 1. Spoil pile slide - occurs when the weight of the dirt or the proximity of the spoil pile to the lip of the trench either allows the dirt to “roll in” or the lip fails and the spoil pile falls into the trench. 2. Shear wall collapse - occurs when a large slab of the trench wall separates and falls in. This is typical in clay type soils. A shear wall collapse occurs very rapidly. 3. Slough-in - occurs when the wall of the trench falls in and leaves an overhanging lip. Utility pipes or running water in the trench commonly causes this type of collapse. 4. Lip slide - occurs when the Lip of the trench fails due to an imposed load. A spoil pile or personnel standing too close to the lip can contribute to the load, causing collapse.
REASONS FOR TRENCH COLLAPSE Moisture Content The moisture or lack of moisture present in soil can contribute to a trench collapse. Soil that is too dry will lose its cohesive strength. Soil that is too wet slides easier. Freeze/thaw cycles can also affect the moisture content and cohesiveness of soil. Imposed Weight Spoil piles, structures, construction materials, equipment and personnel cause downward pressure on the edges of a trench. This pressure can increase the potential for collapse. Vibration Vibrations transmitted through the ground affect the cohesive strength of soil. Equipment operating nearby or traffic even as far away as 500 feet produces enough vibrations to cause a trench wall to collapse. Disturbed Soil Soil that has been excavated at some point in time is considered “disturbed soil”. Soil from previous excavations, fill soil or other “disturbed soils” is more prone to collapse than undisturbed soil. Layering Different types of soil, formed in layers, will decrease the stability of a trench wall. Intersecting Trenches The point where two or more trenches meet, in the form of an “L”, “T” or “X” is particularly unstable and more prone to collapse than one continuous trench. TRENCH HAZARDS Trench collapse responses are low-frequency / high-hazard events. This makes them extremely dangerous for response personnel. There are several hazards present at these incidents. Careful size-up can maximize rescuer safety. The hazards of trench response are: 1. Trench Collapse/Engulfment - The primary hazard associated with trenches is collapse or engulfment. Engulfment is defined as a partial or complete enclosure of the Trench due to a collapse or cave-in. According to OSHA regulations, any trench over five-foot in depth, unless it is in stable rock, must have protection in place. Accidents in trenches occur more frequently than in general construction. When these incidents do occur, the fatality rate is 112% greater than all other construction accidents.
2. Statistics also show that once a trench has collapsed, there is a 50% chance that it will collapse again. 3. Atmospheric Hazards - Trench areas, just like confined space areas contain atmospheric hazards. These hazards include low oxygen, toxic gases and suffocating gases. Before personnel enter a trench to perform a rescue, the atmosphere has to be tested for the above hazards. If atmospheric hazards are found during testing, the necessary actions must be taken to stabilize the atmosphere before rescue personnel can enter the trench. 4. Utilities - Equipment such as Natural Gas pipes, water pipes, storm and/or sanitary sewer lines, electrical, telephone and television cables and other utilities may be present in trenches. If any of these items are present, they must be rendered safe through Lock out/Tag out or other approved methods before rescue operations can precede. 5. Equipment/Mechanical - Backhoes, trenchers, power shovels, de-watering pumps, electric hand tools and other powered equipment can usually be found in trench operations. Before rescue operations can begin, this equipment must be moved, removed or rendered safe through the use of Lock out/Tag out procedures. This may even include removing the key from a piece of equipment and maintaining possession of it until rescue/recovery operations have been completed. 6. Site Hazards - Hazardous materials, nearby traffic and poor housekeeping, are all considered as site hazards. As with other site hazards, these hazards must be controlled or eliminated before the rescue can proceed. Safe Distances and Operating Zones 300’ Rule The recommended safe distance for operating apparatus and equipment is 300’. Responding apparatus should approach no closer than 300’. When an apparatus is within the 300’ safety zone, the engine shall be shut down to eliminate vibrations. This will reduce the potential of a secondary collapse. Operating Zones Hot – within a 50’ radius of the trench Only personnel directly involved with the rescue are allowed in the Hot-Zone. Personnel operating in this area are required to wear proper personal protective equipment. Personnel Accountability Procedures shall be used. Warm – 50’ – 150’ radius of the trench The Warm-Zone is the staging area for equipment and extra personnel.
Cold – 150’ – 300’ radius of the trench Apparatus, personnel and equipment not actively involved in the rescue are to stage in the Cold-Zone. Non-essential personnel, news media representatives and involved civilians (witnesses, company representatives, etc.) shall also be located in the Cold- Zone. In most instances, the Command Post should also be located in the Cold-Zone. INITIAL RESPONSE AND SCENE SIZE-UP The first arriving company should approach with caution and observe established safe distances. First response personnel shall not enter a trench that has collapsed. Statistics show that once a trench has collapsed, there is a 50% chance of secondary collapse. Actions taken by Fire personnel while entering a trench could trigger that secondary collapse. The primary duties of first response personnel are:    Establish Incident Command.    Begin scene size-up.    Secure the scene and stage equipment. These initial tasks can help to shorten the length of time necessary for technical rescue personnel to begin their operation. This shortened length of time is extremely important and can sometimes make the difference between a rescue and a recovery. Establish Command    Establish Incident Command as per OFD procedures.    Make sure the exact location of the incident is clear to all other incoming companies.
Begin Scene Size-up    Survey the scene - Approach the trench from the end whenever possible. This will reduce the potential for secondary collapse. During the initial scene survey attempt to determine the following:    Number of victims.    Last known location (if victim not visible, shovels and other tools could indicate location).    Time since initial collapse.    Type of collapse (Shear-wall, slough in, lip slide, spoil pile slide).    Secondary or additional collapse potential.    Soil type.    Existing protection in place. Secure the Scene    Establish and clear the Hot-Zone. This includes stopping all would-be rescuers.    Shut down all equipment and operations within the 300’ safety zone. This includes streets that fall within the safety zone. Request the assistance of Omaha Police to help secure the safety zone.    Identify and render safe existing or potential hazards (as defined on page 4), such as: o Atmospheric hazards (may consider providing fresh air to victim(s)) o Utility hazards o Water hazards o Equipment hazards o Vibration hazards    Render-safe procedures include lock-out/tag-out of equipment, removing keys, having utilities shut down, etc. Keys should be taken and given to IC. Keys should not be given back to equipment operators until the incident is declared over.    Other hazards or potential hazards which should be considered: o Secondary collapse potential o Weather o Weak structural points o Spoil pile too close Assist Special Operations Personnel Once the scene has been secured, and at the discretion of the Special Operations Personnel, engine /truck company personnel should begin moving support equipment into the Warm-zone. This equipment includes: Ladders, ropes, shovels, debris buckets, EMS equipment, tarps, flashlights and any other equipment, which may be necessary to support the operation.
Engine / Truck Company Personnel shall stand-by for further instruction to assist in scene operations. OFD RESPONSE TO MEDICAL EMERGENCIES AT CONSTRUCTION SITES Occasionally, Omaha Fire personnel are dispatched to injuries and medical emergencies, not related to a cave-in or collapse, at construction sites. When the injured or ill person is in a trench or excavation, response personnel shall evaluate the scene safety before entering to begin medical care. If the trench or excavation is not rendered safe by a recognized method, Omaha Fire Personnel shall not enter. Some of the recognized methods for making a safe trench are:    Shoring – The placement of wood and hydraulic or screw-type jacks at regular intervals against the walls of the trench, to prevent collapse.    Sloping – The grading of the sides of a trench to an angle of 34º or less, depending on the type of soil.    Benching – Cutting the side walls into 4’ high steps. This is only done in soils with good cohesive strength.    Trench Box – A large rigid, steel box that is set into the open excavation by a crane. Work is performed in between the sides of the box. Before entering the trench to render aid to a patient, make sure one or more of these safety measures are in place. Aluminum Hydraulic Shoring   Trench Box Sloped Trench                        Benching
SUMMARY The best action to take when arriving at the scene of a trench collapse is to prepare the scene for the arrival of the Technical Rescue team.    Establish Incident Command    Begin scene size-up    Secure the scene    Assist Special Operations Personnel

--- SP OPS 13-0 ---
SP OPS 13-0 CONFINED SPACE PROCEDURES REVISION HISTORY REVISION                                 DATE REVISION DESCRIPTION                          AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY #                                    REVISED 1           Periodic Revision        Nov 2015        Barney 670      Olson 1021         Olsen 640 2             E23 Updates             Aug 2025        Witte 995    McLaughlin 1035    Bossman 729 PURPOSE The purpose of this procedure is to establish guidelines for conducting confined space rescue operations. Confined space incidents may involve injured persons, persons asphyxiated or overcome by toxic substances, cave-ins, or fires occurring within the space. Pre-incident planning is an important factor in dealing with these situations. If any company predetermines that an area might be considered as a confined space, assigned Special Operations personnel shall be contacted to familiarize themselves with such said area in the event an emergency does arise in that area. This SOP should not be considered in incidents involving Structural Collapse as these require more training, knowledge, skill, and equipment than what is covered in this procedure. POLICY In the event a confined space emergency does occur, the Omaha Fire Department will respond and handle the incident in the most efficient and effective manner according to NFPA 1006: Standard for Rescue Technician Professional Qualifications, 2013 Edition, NFPA 1670; Standard on Operations and Training for Technical Search and Rescue Incidents, 2014 Edition, and OSHA Regulation CFR 29 Permit - Required Confined Spaces – 1910.146 including Appendix A, B, C, D, E, and F. The following guidelines presented in this plan are written with the idea that the Omaha Fire Department Incident Commander will be in charge of and responsible for activities inside the declared incident. The Omaha Fire Department will respond to and assist other agencies outside the city limits and within the Tri -Mutual Aid response area, according to existing agreements, if it is requested. However, when responding to such incidents, the Omaha Fire Department’s officer in charge of the response team will identify the Tri-Mutual Aid officer in charge, report to him, and assist in mitigating and controlling the incident. At no time will an OFD officer take charge of an incident scene outside Omaha Fire Department jurisdiction. However, the said OFD officer shall be responsible for the safety of Omaha Fire Personnel at the scene. DEFINITION A confined space, as defined in NFPA 1006: Standard for Rescue Technician Professional Qualifications, 2013 Edition is; an area large enough and so configured that a member can
bodily enter and perform assigned work but which has limited or restricted means for entry and exit and is not designed for continuous human occupancy. INITIAL RESPONSE: The initial dispatch to a confined space rescue incident shall be; R33, R60, R160, R30, E23, Papillion R3 and a Still Alarm Response compliment including (1) engine, (1) truck, (2) B/C and (1) medic unit. TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS: THE PRIMARY ASSESSMENT The first arriving company officer should attempt to locate and secure a reporting party (RP) or witness to the incident to determine exactly what happened. An immediate assessment of the hazards present to rescuers should be done. Any immediate threats should be relayed, via radio, to all other incoming units. If no RP or witness can be located, the first arriving officer shall use information relayed by dispatch at time of dispatch and clues on scene as to the indication of what possibly happened. If the victim is visible or verbal communication can be made, an initial medical assessment should be done. This may include the mental status, physical condition, mechanism of injury, survivability of victim, and any other obvious conditions that can be determined. It is important to determine the number of victims that may be affected. Appropriate mass casualty procedures should be followed if number of patient’s fall under such procedures. An early decision must be made as to whether the operation will be run in the rescue or recovery mode. THE SECONDARY ASSESSMENT Command should determine what type of confined space is involved. This can be done by consulting with the RP(agency representative). This information may include whether it is a permit-required entry, mechanical or electrical vault, etc.. (For Permit Required Confined Space Entry, the agency representative shall provide their Confined Space Entry Permit. If the agency representative cannot provide this, the Omaha Fire and Rescue Confined Space Entry Permit OFD forms 273 and 273a shall be utilized prior to entry). {See appendix B and C} Locate the number of victims affected and what were they doing (electrical company, gas company, kids playing, etc.). This will give entry personnel an idea of what hazards may be involved. If possible have the RP or witness draw a diagram of the confined space layout. This will also assist the entry personnel of what terrain to expect. It should be determined early as to the structural stability of the confined space. If needed, specialist may need to be called to the scene to assist in determining this need. Omaha Fire personnel should not enter any area deemed unsafe for rescue personnel until it is made safe by the appropriate means, such as ventilation, shoring, cribbing, etc.
INCIDENT COMMANDER RESPONSIBILITIES:    Determine if an adequate number of trained personnel are on the scene to do the rescue/recovery.    Develop an incident action plan based on: o The Confined Space Rescue Checklist (APPENDIX A) o The OFD 273 and 273a forms for Permit Required Confined Space (APPENDIX B and C) o The Confined Space Permit Required Decision Flow Chart (APPENDIX D) o Select the appropriate personnel to carry out tasks based on the incident action plan.    The effect of temperature extremes on personnel.    Consider early rotation of personnel operating on scene. PRE-ENTRY OPERATIONS MAKE THE GENERAL AREA SAFE This can be accomplished by:    Making sure a perimeter is established around the incident.    The size of the perimeter should be dictated by the atmospheric conditions, wind direction, structural stability, etc.  Police should shut down all unnecessary traffic in the area.  Make sure all running apparatus is parked downwind from the scene.  Air monitoring should be established and occurring continuously throughout the entire event.  Establish ventilation where needed to maintain safe operating atmospheric temperatures. STAGING AREA - shall be established. This will be responsible for assembling any anticipated tools or equipment that might be required by the entry teams. This equipment can include but not limit to patient packaging devices (KED, stretcher, stokes basket, etc.), ropes, various hand tools (hammers, shovels, buckets, etc.). REHAB AREA - shall be established for the rotation of crews inside the perimeter. This may also include entry personnel before and after they enter the confined space.
MAKE THE RESCUE AREA SAFE Command should assign an Atmosphere Monitoring Team to determine exactly what hazards and products are within the confined space. Testing should be done in the confined space to determine the oxygen level, flammability, and toxicity. The initial meters recommended for monitoring are the MultiRae meters on R33 and R60 or the Mx4 meter located in Battalion Chief’s vehicles. Based on readings, the Atmosphere Monitoring Team should advise command of the proper level of personnel protective equipment and the type of ventilation required, positive or negative ventilation. The acceptable range for oxygen is will be between 19.5% and 23.5%. The atmosphere is considered safe when flammability is 10% of the LEL. Readings shall be given to command at least every 5 minutes or at an interval set by the IC. Utilities and machinery should be controlled in the perimeter area. Any product that may be flowing in the confined space must be sealed off or diverted if possible to minimize the danger to the rescuers and or victim. It may be determined that the space must be drained of any product prior to entry. Lock-out / Tag-out should be used whenever possible. If this cannot be accomplished, a firefighter shall be posted and the utility or machine turned off and make sure it is not turned back on. SELECTION OF PERSONNEL ENTRY OFFICER/ENTRY TEAM PERSONNEL The Entry Team Leader shall supervise the Entry Team personnel. Entry Team personnel shall be trained to the Confined Space Training Program set forth by the Omaha Fire Department. This training is outlined in NFPA 1006: Standard for Rescue Technician Professional Qualifications, 2013 Edition and NFPA 1670: Standard on Operations and Training for Technical Search and Rescue Incidents, 2014 Edition. A pre-entry briefing for the Entry Team shall be conducted by the Entry Team Leader and the Safety Officer to determine safety hand signals, communication procedures between rescuers, emergency turn around points, and emergency evacuation procedures. The pre-entry briefing shall also include the IC’s pre-approved assignment and roll of the entry team (monitor, recon, victim rescue, etc.). SAFETY OFFICER The safety officer shall be responsible for all safety concerns throughout the incident. The Safety Officer must possess the highest level of training required of the rescue/recovery operation or designate an Assistant Safety Officer who meets the requirement. This will also include making sure there is an appropriate ratio of personnel outside the confined space to support personnel inside. This shall include a standby rescue team with a 1:1 ratio to provide immediate assistance to personnel in the confined space.
REHAB UNIT LEADER The rehab officers function includes making sure firefighters are rested a nd hydrated before being assigned a function. Vitals shall be taken on entry firefighters before and after entry. If a rehab officer feels a firefighter should not entry a confined space, then the firefighter will be replaced with someone of the same training for that job function. The firefighter being replaced will have to remain at rehab until the rehab officer feels it is safe for him to enter the confined space or be reassigned to another job function. The rehab officer will keep a record of all times and vitals taken in the rehab area including time of the firefighters release. See Appendix B. SELECTION OF PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT All entry and back-up personnel shall wear the proper level of personal protective equipment. This shall include head and eye protection, gloves, proper footwear, protective clothing (turnout gear, nomex or PBI jumpsuit), class III harness where appropriate. All entry and back-up personnel should consider using the “SKA”PAKS as a back-up air supply for emergency escape. If Supplied Air Respirators (SAR) are used to enter the confined space, entrants will be required to wear the “SKA”PAK in case of equipment failure. COMMUNICATION AND LIGHTING If the confined space has a flammable atmosphere, entry personnel should use a tag line for communication or a message relay person. Caution should be used when using tag lines, depending on the specific layout it could be an entanglement hazard. The tag line communication must be made prior to entry. If the entry team is entering a dark confined space, proper lighting must be used. ORIENTATION OF CONFINED SPACE Prior to entry into the confined space, the entry team, with the help of the RP or witness should obtain a blue print or diagram of the space. All entry and backup personnel should be made aware of the layout of the space to be entered. All entry and back-up personnel, Command and Safety shall be made aware of the action plan and the back-up plan prior to entry. (For Permit Required Confined Space Entry, the agency representative shall provide their Confined Space Entry Permit. The Omaha Fire and Rescue Confined Space Entry Permit OFD forms 273 and 273a shall be utilized prior to entry). {See appendix B and C} VICTIM REMOVAL EQUIPMENT If possible, the entry team should have a supply of breathable air for the victim. Pure oxygen should be refrained from use in a confined space that has a potentially flammable atmosphere. Rescuers should not remove their breathing apparatus and give it to the victim.
Entry teams should consider the necessary victim retrieval equipment needed prior to entry. This includes respiratory protection for the victim. ASSESSING CONDITION OF VICTIM Upon reaching the victim, entry personnel should do an immediate primary survey of the victim. Make sure it is safe to assist the patient (i.e. patient not entangled, no electrical hazard around patient, etc.) If appropriate, treatment should be started immediately. A quick but thorough secondary assessment of the victim should be done. If time permits, entry personnel should attempt to treat serious injuries prior to packaging and removing. If indicated, complete C-spine precautions should be administered. PATIENT PACKAGING After treatment of immediate life-threatening injuries, the victim should be packaged up for removal from the space. This may include using a backboard, stokes basket, SKED, KED, or some similar device designed for extrication. Prior to removal from the space, the entry team should secure any loose webbing, buckles, straps, or any other device that may hinder the extrication process. VICTIM REMOVAL SYSTEM- HAUL TEAM Prior to removal of a victim, the entry team should have determined the appropriate method of extrication. This may include a vertical or horizontal haul system constructed of ropes, pulleys, and other hardware, as outlined in the Rope Rescue SOG SPC OPS 12 -0. A Haul Team shall be chosen to accomplish the task of constructing the haul system(s). NOTE: If the victim is a CODE 4, the entry team may want to leave the body and related equipment in place for investigative purposes. TERMINATION When all patients have been recovered from the confined space, personnel accountability shall take place. After all Omaha Fire Personnel have been accounted for, tools and equipment used for rescue/recovery shall be recovered and inspected for damage or wear. If a fatality has occurred, some tools and equipment may have to remain on scene for investigative purposes. Decontamination of equipment that may have been contaminated will take place before the equipment is placed back in service. Prior to returning the scene to the RP, one final atmospheric reading shall take place and recorded. Command may consider activating the Critical Incident Stress Debriefing Team if the situation dictates.
APPENDICIES APPENDIX A - CONFINED SPACE RESCUE RESPONSE CHECKLIST    This is a quick reference checklist the IC can use while mitigating a confined space emergency. This may not have to be completed in a chronological order, but all items should be considered during the emergency. This is used just as a quick reference guide. APPENDIX B - Omaha Fire and Rescue Confined Space Entry Permit OFD 273    This form must be completed by the Entry Team Supervisor prior to personnel making entry. APPENDIX C - Omaha Fire and Rescue Confined Space Entry Permit – Safety Readings OFD 273a.    This form must be completed by the Safety Officer or his/her designee. APPENDIX D- Permit Required Confined Space Decision Flow Chart
APPENDIX A - CONFINED SPACE RESCUE RESPONSE CHECKLIST SECURE SCENE: USE PA SYSTEM - SEND SENTRY - BARRICADE AREA JOBS: □ Leader            □ Safety              □ Medical            □Rehab □ Entry Team        □ Back-up Team        □ Haul Team □ Lowering          □ Ventilation         □ Monitoring         □ Belays EQUIPMENT: □ Monitor           □ Harnesses           □ Patient Air        □ Pre-Rigged Haul System □ Ventilation       □ Radios              □ Tripod             □ Medical Equip □ SCBA/SAR          □ Lighting            □ Air Bottles        □ Rope Rescue Equip INFORMATION: ASK: Attendant?          □ How many/who?                 □ Doing What?           □ When? Permit Space?       □ Hazards?                      □ Where/Layout?         □ Entry Permit? Witnesses?          □ Medical History?              □ Other access?         □ Attendant? COMMUNICATION WITH PATIENT: □ Did you fall?             □ Crawl toward opening?                   □ Any others? □ Other injuries?           □ Connect to haul System?                 □ Can they move? AIR MONITORING: □ Initial                    □ Continuous               □ Use Log EXTERIOR RESCUE: □ Using lifelines - Patient Self Help? - Remote Connections NEGATE HAZARDS: □ Lock-out/Tag-out           □ Ventilation              □ Fall Protection □ Block / Bleed              □ Purge – Air, Steam, CO2, Nitrogen
MEDICAL: □ KED                  □ Patient Harness   □ Backboard □ Vitals Monitoring    □ C-Collar          □ Patient Air Supply □ Med. Bags            □ Litters APPENDIX B - OMAHA FIRE DEPARTMENT CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PERMIT OFD
Standard Operating Procedures                                                             SP OPS 13-0 CONTROLS/EQUIPMENT Check all that apply GENERAL INFORMATION Permit Space Location: __________________________                    Isolation        Lockout/Tagout Space to be Entered: ____________________________                                Blanking/Blinding Purpose of Entry: _______________________________                                Double Block and Bleed Entry Permit Valid For: Date: ______ to: Date: ______                            Line Breaking/Misalignment Time: ______ to: Time: ______                                       Other_____________________ Inerting Purge/Clean PERMIT SPACE HAZARDS Atmospheric                                      YES      NO        Methods for Safe Cover Removal and Securing Area Oxygen Deficiency                                               Atmospheric Testing Oxygen Enrichment                                                  Periodic (Give interval)____________________ Explosive (Gas/Vapor)                                              Continuous Explosive Dust                                                Signs and Barricades Carbon Monoxide                                                 Permit Required confined space danger sign is Hydrogen Sulfide                                               posted at entry point (s). Other Toxic Gases/Vapors                                        Proper Barricades (Cones, Tape, etc.) are placed Engulfment                                                         around entry point (s). Configuration (Entrapment)                                          Ventilation Mechanical                                                             Continuous Forced Air Local Exhaust Electrical                                                          Entry Equipment Substance Hazardous to Skin or Eyes                                    Ladders Heat Stress                                                            Other _____________________________ Other Potential Hazards                                             Personal Protective Equipment i.e. radiation, noise, etc.                                           Respiratory SCBA      SAR Protective clothing (specify)_____________ _____________________________________ _____________________________________ Rescue and Retrieval Equipment PERSONNEL Full body harness      Explosion proof lighting Entrants (s)                                                          Lifeline           Sked/Stokes Tripod _________________________________                ____     ____      Non-Sparking Tools _________________________________                ____     ____      Monitoring Equipment _________________________________                ____     ____        Personnel Awareness: _________________________________                ____     ____          Pre-entry briefing on specific hazards and Control methods. Attendants (s) _________________________________                    Communications Equipment ______________________________________________                        Radio             Phone Entry Supervisor (s) ____________________________                     Other __________________________________ ______________________________________________                      Hot Work Permit Fire Extinguishers COMMUNICATION PROCEDURE USED by ENTRANT(S) and ATTENDANT(S) Check all that apply Visual     Voice    Rope    Radio Other (specify) ______________________________ ENTRY CANCELLATION ENTRY CANCELLED BY: Name _______________________________________________ Time __________________ Signature ____________________________________________ Date__________________ Reason for Cancellation:     Rescue Operation Completed
Standard Operating Procedures                                                            SP OPS 13-0 Prohibited Condition Arose (specify) _________________________________________ ____________________________________________________________________________ OFD 273 APPENDIX C - OMAHA FIRE DEPARTMENT CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PERMIT-SAFETY READINGS OFD 273a TESTING RECORD_______________ Acceptable     Result/      Result/     Result/     Result/ Time                 Conditions      Time         Time          ’         Time         TLV        PEL     IDLH Time Oxygen Min/Max          >19.5%.<23.5%
Standard Operating Procedures                                                                              SP OPS 13-0 Ammonia NH3                 <25 ppm Flammability                <10% LEL/LFL H2S        Hydrogen         <10 ppm Sulfide Toxic (Specify) CL 2 Chlorine               <0.5 ppm CO           Carbon         <35 ppm Monoxide SO2 Sulfur Dioxide          <2 ppm o Heat                            F / oC Other Tester Initials THIS PERMIT MUST BE POSTED ON JOB SITE . GOOD ONLY ON INDICATED DATE Entrants                                 Avail. Air        Time In        Time Out          B/P           Pulse          Resp.          Temp. Patient AUTHORIZATION BY ENTRY SUPERVISORS I certify that all required precautions have been taken and necessary equipment is provided for safe entry and work in this c onfined space. Printed Name                                 Signature                                   Date                        Time ______________________                      ________________________                      _____________               _______________ ______________________                      ________________________                      _____________               _______________ ______________________                      ________________________                      _____________               _______________ ______________________                      ________________________                      _____________               _______________
Appendix D – 1910.146- Permit Required Confined Space Decision Flow Chart ❑   Does the workplace contain Confined Spaces or Permit Required Confined Spaces as defined by OSHA CFR 29 1910.146? Yes or No ❑   Will Confined Space be entered for Rescue? Yes or No (If No: Conduct Non- Entry Rescue) ❑   Does the Confined Space have known potential Hazards? Yes or No (If No: The Confined Space is not permit required) ❑   Can the space be maintained in a condition safe to enter by continuous forced air ventilation or natural ventilation only? Yes or No ❑   Prepare for entry via permit procedures. ❑   Before entry; verify acceptable entry conditions. (i.e. rescuers properly equipped, rescue communications established, space isolated if needed, etc.) ❑   Permit issued by authorizing signature and acceptable conditions maintained throughout entry. If acceptable conditions fail, emergency exit must be ordered and entry permit voided. ❑   Once entry tasks are completed, permit is cancelled. ❑   Conduct post entry evaluation with entrants, attendants, operations, command, and support personnel.

--- SP OPS 15-0 ---
SP OPS 15-0 BOMB – EXPLOSIVE DEVICE RESPONSE REVISION HISTORY REVISION #   REVISION DESCRIPTION      DATE REVISED      AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY       APPROVED BY 1           Periodic Review          Nov 2015       Phillips 850    Salcedo 816        Olsen 640 POLICY The guidelines in this Standard Operating Procedure provide guidance for Omaha Fire Department responders at incidents involving unsuspected, suspected or confirmed bombs and other explosive devices. These procedures set forth a safe and efficient method of handling a bomb or explosive device response. These guidelines shall be followed when the fire department responds to a bomb threat or when explosives are brought to a station, and for explosives encountered during routine operations. The procedures outlined are not intended to limit the responding Officers from exercising sound judgment based on the individual circumstances found at each situation. RESPONSE PROCEDURES The 911 Communications Center shall use the terminology "SIGNAL 9" to advise the responding Fire Department personnel that the assignment is a bomb or explosive device incident. The word(s) bomb, explosive device or other similar terminology shall no t be used while communicating on radio equipment, only the term “Signal 9” shall be used when referring to a bomb or explosive device. The initial response for a bomb or explosive device incident shall be a Battalion Chief, Engine Company and a Medic Unit. The Battalion Chief will act as the liaison and will coordinate Fire Department responsibilities with the Law Enforcement Agencies Command Staff. The correct procedure will be for the Communications Operator to dispatch the responding Unit or Companies, "Address or Location, Signal 9" The address given at the time of the dispatch will be the location of the bomb or explosive device itself. Responding Units or Companies will need to acquire the location of the Law Enforcement Agency command post and respond to that location. The Unit or Companies will respond to the location of the Law Enforcement Agency command post NOT to the location of the bomb or explosive device itself.
Under no circumstances will any radio, cellular telephone or other type of electr onic communication be allowed from the vicinity of the bomb scene, which in all cases is a minimum of 300 feet. This includes all live broadcasts and electronic communication by the news media. Responding From Quarters: After initial dispatch ("Address or Location, Signal 9"), the Unit or Company will clear-up on the address or unplug their status plug and then radio the dispatcher for the Law Enforcement Agency command post location while remaining in quarters. After receiving the Law Enforcement Agency command post location, the Unit or Company shall then *respond to the command post location. Responding From Outside Quarters: After initial dispatch ("Address or Location, Signal 9"), the Unit or Company will clear -up on the address and then *respond in the direction of the “signal 9” location or standby depending on their proximity to the “signal 9” location, but never respond to the “signal 9” location. While responding the Unit or Company shall radio the dispatcher for the Law Enforcement Ag ency command post location. After receiving the Law Enforcement Agency command post location, the Unit or Company shall then *respond to the command post location. *NOTE:        Units or Companies shall respond on a route that will not take them near the “signal 9” location while responding to the Law Enforcement Agency command post location. Units or Companies shall never respond nearer than the approximate distance the command post location is from the “signal 9” location. FIRE AND RESCUE CONSIDERATIONS AT BOMBS / EXPLOSIVE DEVICE INCIDENTS During emergency operations and during overhaul, be alert for additional explosive devices (this could be anything that may seem out of place). If an object is suspected of being an explosive device, do not touch it or allow anyone else to touch it. Notify (not by radio) the Law Enforcement Agencies Command Staff and the Incident Commander immediately. If an explosion and/or fire occurs, be aware that secondary explosions may occur. Utilize any available protective cover during firefighting operations. Always expect the un-expected when dealing with explosive devices. A size-up should be conducted to help determine possible strategies in case an actual explosion does occur. The structure may change shape as well as become structurally unsound after an explosion. A large fire and delayed attack may result, directly impacting fire flow. Exposures should be taken into account early on in the incident to ensure adequate coverage should an explosion occur. Do not lay in from hydrant or commit your apparatus until necessary.
FIRE DEPARTMENT ROLE AT BOMBS/EXPLOSIVE INCIDENTS The responsibility of the Omaha Fire Department at a bomb or explosive device incident is to standby and assist the Law Enforcement Agency mitigating the incident.    Do not become involved in the police functions    Do not become involved in bomb disposal operations.    Standby and await instructions. EXPLOSIVES ENCOUNTERED DURING ROUTINE ACTIVITIES Whenever explosives, suspected bombs or explosive devices are encountered during the course of routine operations, Fire Department personnel shall be guided by the following:    Refrain from touching or moving the suspected device.    Evacuate the immediate area and establish an operational perimeter.    Allow no unauthorized personnel within an operational perimeter.    Contact 911 Communication (utilize radios or cell phones only from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet away to avoid possible detonation) and request the area Law Enforcement Agency respond. EXPLOSIVES BROUGHT TO THE FIRE STATION In the event that any person brings a suspected bomb, explosive device, or any amount of explosives into a Fire Station, Fire Department members shall be guided by the following:    Secure the area around the device.    Notify the area Law Enforcement Agency through the dispatcher by landline telephone, not by radio or cell phone.    Evacuate personnel and apparatus from the station.    Obtain identification and all pertinent information from the person(s) at the scene until the area Law Enforcement Agency arrives.    Do not use radios or cell phones in the immediate area as they could possibly initiate detonation of the suspected device.
Appendix A - Omaha Police Department SOP The following is part of the Omaha Police Department’s SOP for a bomb or explosive device incident. The Omaha Police Department’s SOP shall be considered Omaha Fire Department SOP for a bomb or explosive device incident whenever applicable. This information is being included so fire personnel will have a basic understanding of Law Enforcement procedures at a bomb / explosive device incident. Omaha Police Department SOP (OPS B) Bombs / explosive devices Incidents involving explosive devices can be separated into three categories:    Threatened use of an explosive device, i.e., "bomb threat"; (The above section not applicable and not shown)    Discovery of an actual or suspected explosive device; and,    Detonation of an explosive device. DISCOVERY OF AN ACTUAL OR SUSPECTED EXPLOSIVE DEVICE: When an actual or suspected explosive device is found, the following procedures shall be implemented immediately: A.     The Uniform Patrol Bureau Sergeant shall immediately establish a command post, an outer perimeter, and evacuate all non-essential personnel to a safe distance. (See the following chart in SOP OPS B, for recommended minimum safe distances). When the scene is in a multi-storied structure with reinforced concrete floors and ceilings, the following floors shall be evacuated: 1.       The floor where the suspected explosive device is located. 2.       The floor directly above. 3.       The floor directly below. Once the area is evacuated, the Uniform Patrol Bureau Sergeant shall ensure that officers are placed as necessary to prohibit re-entry into the danger area by unauthorized persons. All law enforcement personnel at the scene, including FBI personnel, may be used to assist with the rapid evacuation of the bomb scene and to assist with traffic control until the scene is cleared and adequately sealed off.
B.     The Uniform Patrol Bureau Sergeant shall contact 911 by telephone and request one (1) Medic Unit, one (1) Engine Company, and one (1) Battalion Chief be dispatched to the outer perimeter of the danger area. C.     911 will immediately announce over all radio channels that there is a confirmed signal 9 at the location. D.    The Uniform Patrol Sergeant shall contact the Precinct Lieutenant by telephone. The sergeant shall brief the Precinct Lieutenant of all pertinent information. E.     The Precinct Lieutenant shall contact the commander of the Bomb Response Team. The Bomb Response Team Commander shall direct that two (2) bomb technicians respond to the scene with the proper disposal equipment. (The Bomb Response Team is responsible for maintaining a comprehensive list of all required bomb disposal equipment). F. The Precinct Lieutenant will proceed to the scene and assume command of the outer perimeter command post. G.    The Bomb Response Team Commander will arrive at the scene, set up an inner perimeter, take control of the actual scene and determine if further evacuation is needed. The Uniform Patrol Bureau Lieutenant will remain in command of the outer perimeter, restrict access to authorized personnel only and supervise the evacuation of the danger area. H.     The Bomb Response Team shall not approach any suspected explosive device until the area has been evacuated. I.    No personnel other than the Bomb Response Team shall be within the danger area once the area has been evacuated. J.     After setting up an inner perimeter, the Bomb Response Team Commander will designate a runner or liaison person so that there can be constant communication between the inner and outer perimeters. K.     A land line will be established from both the inner and outer perimeters to allow for off - site communication. L.     The Bomb Response Team may determine that the explosive device may not be rendered safe at the scene. When the Bomb Response Team transports an explosive device from the scene, one (1) officer in a marked cruiser shall provide an escort. All needed Fire Department units shall follow the Bomb Response Team and the cruiser to the safe disposal area. The Fire Department units shall stand by until the device has been rendered safe. M.      The Bomb Response Team shall notify the Uniform Patrol Bureau Lieutenant when civilian personnel are allowed to return to the scene and when normal radio traffic may
resume. The Public Information Officer will proceed to the scene and handle all communications with the news media. N.     According to the best information available, the use of radio signals generated by radios, cellular telephones and other types of electronic communication can set off certain types of explosive devices, therefore: Under no circumstances will any radio, cellular telephone or other type of electro nic communication be allowed from the vicinity of the bomb scene, which in all cases is a minimum of 300 feet. This includes all live broadcasts and electronic communication by the news media. ACTUAL EXPLOSION BY A DEVICE OR UNKNOWN ORIGIN: If an actual explosion does occur, the following procedures shall be followed: A.    The responding officers and the Uniform Patrol Sergeant shall treat the area like any crime scene and remain alert for possible secondary explosions from: 1.    Additional devices planted at the scene; 2.    Explosive gases, liquids, or chemicals; or, 3.    Undetonated explosive debris scattered by the original explosion. B.     The responding officers shall protect the scene and ensure that persons are evacuated from the danger area. Those persons who require medical attention shall be treated by qualified medical personnel. C.     The Uniform Patrol Sergeant shall contact the 911 dispatcher and request the following be sent to the scene: 1.     A representative from the Omaha Public Power District (OPPD); 2.     A representative from the Metropolitan Utilities District (MUD); and, 3.     Any necessary Fire Department Units, e.g., Medic Unit, Engine Company, Battalion Chief, etc. D.     The Uniform Patrol Sergeant shall contact the Precinct Lieutenant and provide a briefing regarding the incident. E.   After the Precinct Lieutenant is briefed, he/she shall contact the commander of the BRT. The commander shall send the needed BRT technicians to the scene. Then the
Precinct Lieutenant shall contact the Crime Laboratory to send the necessary Crime Lab technicians to the scene. F.    Ensure that ONLY the BRT conducts any search. G.    Divert vehicular and pedestrian traffic away from the scene. H.    Note any unusual odors, sounds, and the color of any fire or smoke. I.  The Uniform Patrol Sergeant shall ensure that every officer at the scene prepares a SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT PO 200 documenting his/her actions. DANGER AREA DATA: The safe minimum distance from an explosive device varies due to: A.    Type of structure; B.    Type and size of the device; C.    If any explosive, toxic, or flammable materials are near the device; and, D.    Confined spaces, etc. The following chart is provided as a guide only. The listed figures should be considered the MINIMUM safe distance. Increase the distance if the situation warrants. Explosive    Demolish        Irreparable   Repairable     Minor            Min. Safe Weight       Radius          Damage(ft.)   Damage (ft.)   Damage (ft.)     Distance (lbs.)       (ft.)                                                         (ft.) 1-10         3-5             5-9           20             100              900 10-25        6-10            10-15         30             150              1740 50           12              23            50             340              2160 150          20              50            100            650              3180 230          30              60            170            800              3720 500          35              95            190            1170             3800
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 17-0 LARGE AREA SEARCH TEAMS (LAST) REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION       DATE REVISED      AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 2             Radio Upgrades           Dec 2017        Folger 783       Ryan 679         Olsen 640 Complete Revision w/ new 3                                      Jan 2022        Ryan 679        McCaw 897         Olsen 640 SCBA deployment PURPOSE     Firefighter awareness regarding important points of information, effective tactics and cautionary elements for when using a Large Area Search Team (LAST) and/or a rope oriented search for injured, trapped or lost Firefighters.     Provide a framework of uncomplicated practices that includes simple and purposeful approaches that will provide for accountable and safer rescue operations.     Understanding of when, where and why not to utilize a LAST. NOTE: Proficient use of a thermal imaging camera(s) (TIC) is a key to the success for a LAST. POLICY Where & When to Use a LAST     LAST’s are intended for a very specific type of search and rescue scenario where when deciding to employ a rope oriented search, factors must be taken into account as to whether a LAST operation will be both successful and would prevent further rescuer endangerment.     LAST’s can be productive for a particular situation but, should be reserved only for large open area structures that may include: Shopping Centers, Warehouses, Assemblies, Department Stores, Storage Facilities, Wide Rises, etc.     Caution should be used for any potential environments where structural or content impediments may be encountered that would cause delayed progress, rope entanglements and the need for additional resources to mitigate these hazards. Equipment All OFD Truck Companies, R33, and R60, are equipped with a LAST equipment bag and a newly issued Scott RIT-PAK. The equipment bag and RIT-PAK will contain:     One yellow rope bag containing 300ft. of 3/8” utility rope o One locking carabineer (separate and unattached to webbing) o One 48 in. tether (orange webbing) with locking carabineers attached to each end

--- SP OPS 17-0 ---
o Two 20 in. tethers (blue webbing) with locking carabineers tied to each end    RIT-PAK o One rescue SCBA (full bottle) packaged in the RIT-PAK. o Trucks have a 30 min bottle and Rescues have a 60 min bottle. o C5 facepiece with regulator. o Universal high-pressure charging wand that can connect to another SCBA’s (down Firefighter) RIC/UAC connection.    Other tools and equipment to think about: o Thermal Imaging Camera(s) (TIC), forcible entry tools, hand or battery tools, webbing, hand-lights, etc. Communications    Solid communications should also be considered as paramount for a successful outcome when a LAST is utilized.    Communications should normally be utilized in the same manner as in a MAYDAY OPS 10-1 MAYDAY Procedures o The Firefighter in distress and the RIC and/or LAST can operate on the originally assigned TAC or the next greater odd numbered TAC or potentially on TAC 16. This is dependent on the IC’s decision.    Communications are a key to a swift rescue operation to include; down/lost Firefighter location, entry point judgements, resource allocations, fire/smoke control efforts, hazard evaluations and equipment or tool needs, etc. LAST Resources    Each LAST should consist of four personnel. o Four personnel may divide into two distinct two person teams when additional tools/equipment are possible for unknown interior needs.    Depending on the incident; more than one LAST may be deployed.    Recognize that a single LAST may need to exit for air before search or rescue is completed.    Consideration must be given to ensure that each LAST has a back-up.    Whenever a LAST is deployed, a Rescue Group Supervisor should be appointed.    Whenever a LAST is deployed, an Entry Control Officer should be appointed for accountability. Safety & Tactics    Develop a competent action plan for rescue - Based on the best available information.    Prior to LAST entry - Remember: o Keep it simple and the search should be fast and methodical.
o Acknowledge the hazards and our limitations. o Ensure accountability and back-up personnel are in-place. o Know your air management with a full air supply. o LAST egress should be same as entry, but have an alternative exit strategy.    Five basic steps for Firefighter rescue or a LAST during a MAYDAY o Locate Firefighter o Provide Air o Extricate o Package o Remove    The initial LAST may not be the team that is able to evacuate the Firefighter.    Understand that managing the main search line is critical for safety and efficiency. o Keeping the main search line taut is preferable when able to do so. o Significant changes of direction while searching may require additional anchor points for the main search line to avoid entanglements. o A wet or dry hose line of sufficient length can be considered for use in place of a search rope when using a LAST.    When appropriate and/or useful, personnel have the option to tether off of the main search line. o As with the main search line, care should be taken to avoid entanglements. o Webbing is preferred to rope for tethers and small diameter rope should be avoided for tethering. o Tethering should be of a manageable length. Usually less than twenty feet. o Never cross over the main line. Tethered searches should stay on one side of the main search line always.    Multiple TIC’s in use by a LAST can accelerate the search and rescue timeline.    Acknowledge that statistically, a significant percentage of rescue scenarios involving a Firefighter MAYDAY and a RIC or rescue team can cause additional emergencies and rescue needs. Contraindications or When to Consider Not Using a LAST Rope Oriented Search    Interior conditions where numerous structural or content’s obstacles are in place.    Search scenarios where multiple changes of direction are anticipated.    Smaller, compact and partitioned interior floorplans.    Search patterns that would require use of stairways or changes in elevation.    High heat and heavy smoke environments or other circumstances that necessitate crawling while searching.    Any interior conditions that would cause a high probability rate of rope entanglements occurring between the structure, the contents and/or the rescuers.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 18-0 WATERCRAFT OPERATIONS REVISION HISTORY REVISION #    REVISION DESCRIPTION     DATE REVISED       AUTHOR        REVIEWED BY      APPROVED BY 4                 Update              May 2024       Werner 933      Salcedo 816     Bossman 729 5            Equipment Updates        Jan 2025        Witte 995      Salcedo 816     Bossman 729 6               E23 Updates           Aug 2025        Witte 995    McLaughlin 1035   Bossman 729 PURPOSE This Standard Operating Procedure addresses procedures detailing the operation of watercraft; qualified personnel, care and maintenance of the watercraft, requests for support, and the use of special equipment. This policy is to create an effective response to surface water rescue incidents, including a safe working environment, for the use of watercraft for PERSONAL SAFETY Personnel are expected to ensure proper safety equipment is available prior to departure from land. They are also expected to bring with them the equipment necessary to provide the services required for that particular situation. EQUIPMENT (BOATS & WATERCRAFT) •    WR1 - Missouri River Mako Rescue Boat – 8 persons or 1,500lbs •    WR43 - Rescue One Dive/Sonar Boat – 8 persons or 1,250lbs •    WR23 - Yamaha Wave Runner VX 1050E - 3 persons or 530lbs •    WR63 - Yamaha Wave Runner VX 1050E- 3 persons or 530lbs •    WR33 - Achilles Inflatable Rubber Boat (IRB) – 6 persons or 1,870lbs •    WR60 - Achilles Inflatable Rubber Boat (IRB) – 6 persons or 1,870lbs

--- SP OPS 18-0 ---
RESPONSE/DISPATCH Incidents East by zones • WR23, WR33, WR43 and R33 • Closest Truck, BC, and Medic Unit • FC71 and TC1 notified by dispatch Incidents West by zones • WR63, WR60, WR43, and R60 • Closest Truck, BC, and Medic Unit • FC71 and TC1 notified by dispatch PERSONAL PROTECTIVE AND RESCUE EQUIPMENT Personal Flotation Device (PFD) The greatest risk to rescue personnel is that of drowning. The only adequate protection is by wearing a properly fitting, USCG approved type III (or better) PFD. Fire Department personnel shall wear an approved PFD at all times while: • Riding in or on any watercraft while moving under power. • Engaged in an emergency response on or near the water. • Engaged in any other operation in or around the water • In any situation where the member is at risk for falling into the water. Personnel are expected to know their own swimming limitations and take the appropriate measures to ensure their own safety, as well as the safety of any possible victims. Helmet Required for all Jet Ski operations. Only approved water rescue helmets are to be worn. No structural helmet should be worn on any vessel or within 5 feet of the water’s edge. Additional Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Fire Department personnel are expected to evaluate each situation and utilize an appropriate level of personal protection to ensure the safety of each individual member. In addit ion to thermal protection and an approved PFD, this may include head protection, gloves, foot protection, safety lines, waterproof flashlights and/or strobes, etc. If an appropriate protection level cannot be achieved with the available resources, additional resources should be requested and alternative measures should be employed until an acceptable protection level can be attained.